@card@ . the spring be fairly with us now . outside my laboratory window the great be all cover with the big , glutinous , gummy bud , some of which have already begin to break into little green shuttlecock . as you walk down the lane you be conscious of the rich , silent force of nature work all around you . the wet earth smell fruitful and luscious . green shoot be peep out everywhere . the twig be stiff with their sap ; and the moist , heavy english air be lade with a faintly resinous perfume . bud in the hedge , lamb beneath the work of reproduction go forward ! i can see it without , and i can feel it within . we also have our spring when the little arteriole dilate , the lymph flow in a brisk stream , the gland work harder , winnow and strain . every year nature readjust the whole machine . i can feel the ferment in my blood at this very moment , and as the cool sunshine pour through my window i could dance about in it like a gnat . so i should , only that would rush upstairs to know what be the matter . besides , i must remember that i be . an old professor may afford to be natural , but when fortune have give one of the first chair in the university to a man of he must try and act the part consistently . what a fellow be ! if i could only throw the same enthusiasm into physiology that he do into psychology , i should become a at the least . his whole life and soul and energy work to one end . he drop to sleep collate his result of the past day , and he wake to plan his research for the come one . and yet , outside the narrow circle who follow his proceeding , he get so little credit for it . physiology be a recognize science . if i add even a brick to the edifice , every one see and applaud it . but be try to dig the foundation for a science of the future . his work be underground and do not show . yet he go on , corresponding with a hundred in the hope of find one reliable witness , sift a hundred lie on the chance of gain one little speck of truth , collate old book , devour new one , experiment , lecture , try to light up in other the fiery interest which be consume him . i be fill with wonder and admiration when i think of him , and yet , when he ask me to associate myself with his research , i be compel to tell him that , in their present state , they offer little attraction to a man who be devote to exact science . if he could show me something positive and objective , i might then be tempt to approach the question from its physiological side . so long as half his subject be taint with and the other half with hysteria we physiologist must content ourselves with the body and leave the mind to our descendant . no doubt i be a materialist . say that i be a rank one . i tell her that be an excellent reason for shorten our engagement , since i be in such urgent need of her spirituality . and yet i may claim to be a curious example of the effect of education upon temperament , for by nature i be , unless i deceive myself , a highly psychic man . i be a nervous , sensitive boy , a dreamer , a somnambulist , full of impression and intuition . my black hair , my dark eye , my thin , olive face , my taper finger , be all characteristic of my real temperament , and cause expert like to claim me as their own . but my brain be soak with exact knowledge . i have train myself to deal only with fact and with proof . surmise and fancy have no place in my scheme of thought . show me what i can see with my microscope , cut with my scalpel , weigh in my balance , and i will devote a lifetime to its investigation . but when you ask me to study feeling , impression , suggestion , you ask me to do what be distasteful and even demoralize . a departure from pure reason affect me like an evil smell or a musical discord . which be a very sufficient reason why i be a little loath to go to 's tonight . still i feel that i could hardly get out of the invitation without positive rudeness ; and , now that and be go , of course i would not if i could . but i have rather meet them anywhere else . i know that would draw me into this nebulous of his if he could . in his enthusiasm he be perfectly impervious to hint or remonstrance . nothing short of a positive quarrel will make him realize my aversion to the whole business . i have no doubt that he have some new mesmerist or clairvoyant or medium or trickster of some sort whom he be go to exhibit to us , for even his entertainment bear upon his hobby . well , it will be a treat for , at any rate . she be interested in it , as woman usually be in whatever be vague and mystical and indefinite . @card@ this of mine be , i fancy , the outcome of that scientific habit of mind about which i write this morning . i like to register impression while they be fresh . once a day at least i endeavor to define my own mental position . it be a useful piece of self-analysis , and have , i fancy , a steady effect upon the character . frankly , i must confess that my own need what stiffen i can give it . i fear that , after all , much of my neurotic temperament survive , and that i be far from that cool , calm precision which characterize or . otherwise , why should the tomfoolery which i have witness this evening have set my nerve thrill so that even now i be all unstring ? my only comfort be that neither nor nor even could have possibly know my weakness . and what in the world be there to excite me ? nothing , or so little that it will seem ludicrous when i set it down . the get to 's before me . in fact , i be one of the last to arrive and find the room crowd . i have hardly time to say a word to and to , who be look charming in white and pink , with glitter in her hair , when come twitch at my sleeve . " you want something positive , , " say he , draw me apart into a corner . " my dear fellow , i have a phenomenon ! " i should have be more impressed have i not hear the same before . his sanguine spirit turn every into a star . " no possible question about the bona fide this time , " say he , in answer , perhaps , to some little gleam of amusement in my eye . " my wife have know her for many year . they both come from , you know . have only be in a month or two , and know no one outside the university circle , but i assure you that the thing she have tell us suffice in themselves to establish clairvoyance upon an absolutely scientific basis . there be nothing like her , amateur or professional . come and be introduce ! " i like none of these , but the amateur least of all . with the pay performer you may pounce upon him and expose him the instant that you have see through his trick . he be there to deceive you , and you be there to find him out . but what be you to do with the friend of your host 's wife ? be you to turn on a light suddenly and expose her slapping a surreptitious banjo ? or be you to hurl cochineal over her evening frock when she steal round with her phosphorus bottle and her supernatural platitude ? there would be a scene , and you would be look upon as a brute . so you have your choice of be that or a dupe . i be in no very good humor as i follow to the lady . any one less like my idea of a could not be imagine . she be a small , frail creature , well over forty , i should say , with a pale , peaky face , and hair of a very light shade of chestnut . her presence be insignificant and her manner retire . in any group of ten woman she would have be the last whom one would have pick out . her eye be perhaps her most remarkable , and also , i be compel to say , her least pleasant , feature . they be gray in color , -- with a shade of green , -- their expression strike me as be decidedly furtive . i wonder if furtive be the word , or should i have say fierce ? on second thought , feline would have express it well . a crutch lean against the wall tell me what be painfully evident when she rise : that one of her leg be cripple . so i be introduce to , and it do not escape me that as my name be mention she glance across at . have evidently be talk . and presently , no doubt , think i , she will inform me by occult mean that i be engage to a young lady with in her hair . i wonder how much more have be tell her about me . " be a terrible sceptic , " say he ; " i hope , , that you will be able to convert him . " she look keenly up at me . " be quite right to be sceptical if he have not see any thing convincing , " say she . " i should have think , " she add , " that you would yourself have be an excellent subject . " " for what , may i ask ? " say " well , for mesmerism , for example . " " my experience have be that mesmerist go for their subject to those who be mentally unsound . all their result be vitiate , as it seem to me , by the fact that they be deal with abnormal organism . " " which of these lady would you say possess a normal organism ? " she ask . " i should like you to select the one who seem to you to have the well balanced mind . should we say the girl in pink and white ? -- , i think the name be . " " yes , i should attach weight to any result from her . " " i have never try how far she be impressionable . of course some people respond much more rapidly than other . may i ask how far your scepticism extend ? i suppose that you admit the mesmeric sleep and the power of suggestion . " " i admit nothing , . " " me , i think science have get further than that . of course i know nothing about the scientific side of it . i only know what i can do . you see the girl in red , for example , over near the japanese jar . i shall will that she come across to us . " she bend forward as she speak and drop her fan upon the floor . the girl whisk round and come straight toward us , with an look upon her face , as if some one have call her . " what do you think of that , ? " cry , in a kind of ecstasy . i do not dare to tell him what i think of it . to me it be the most barefaced , shameless piece of imposture that i have ever witness . the collusion and the signal have really be too obvious . " be not satisfy , " say she , glance up at me with her strange little eye . " my poor fan be to get the credit of that experiment . well , we must try something else . , would you have any objection to my put you off ? " " oh , i should love it ! " cry . by this time all the company have gather round us in a circle , the man , and the woman , some awe , some critical , as though it be something between a religious ceremony and a conjurer 's entertainment . a red velvet have be push into the centre , and lie back in it , a little flush and tremble slightly from excitement . i could see it from the vibration of the . rise from her seat and stand over her , lean upon her crutch . and there be a change in the woman . she no longer seem small or insignificant . twenty year be go from her age . her eye be shine , a tinge of color have come into her sallow cheek , her whole figure have expand . so i have see a , listless lad change in an instant into briskness and life when give a task of which he feel himself master . she look down at with an expression which i resent from the bottom of my expression with which a empress might have look at her kneel slave . then with a quick , commanding gesture she toss up her arm and sweep them slowly down in front of her . i be watch narrowly . during three pass she seem to be simply amuse . at the fourth i observe a slight glazing of her eye , accompany by some dilation of her pupil . at the sixth there be a momentary rigor . at the seventh her lid begin to droop . at the tenth her eye be close , and her breathing be slow and full than usual . i try as i watch to preserve my scientific calm , but a foolish , causeless agitation convulse me . i trust that i hide it , but i feel as a child feel in the dark . i could not have believe that i be still open to such weakness . " she be in the trance , " say . " she be sleep ! " i cry . " wake her , then ! " i pull her by the arm and shout in her ear . she might have be dead for all the impression that i could make . her body be there on the velvet chair . her organ be heart , her lung . but her soul ! it have slip from beyond our ken . whither have it go ? what power have dispossess it ? i be puzzle and disconcert . " so much for the mesmeric sleep , " say . " as regard suggestion , whatever i may suggest will infallibly do , whether it be now or after she have awaken from her trance . do you demand proof of it ? " " certainly , " say " you shall have it . " i see a smile pass over her face , as though an amusing thought have strike her . she stoop and whisper earnestly into her subject 's ear . , who have be so deaf to me , nod her head as she listen . " awake ! " cry , with a sharp tap of her crutch upon the floor . the eye open , the glazing clear slowly away , and the soul look out once more after its strange eclipse . we go away early . be none the bad for her strange excursion , but i be nervous and unstrung , unable to listen to or answer the stream of comment which be pour out for my benefit . as i bid her slip a piece of paper into my hand . " pray forgive me , " say she , " if i take mean to overcome your scepticism . open this note at ten o'clock morning . it be a little private test . " i ca n't imagine what she mean , but there be the note , and it shall be open as she direct . my head be ache , and i have write enough for . i dare say that what seem so inexplicable will take quite another complexion . i shall not surrender my conviction without a struggle . @card@ . i be amaze , confound . it be clear that i must reconsider my opinion upon this matter . but first let me place on record what have occur . i have finish breakfast , and be look over some diagram with which my lecture be to be illustrate , when my housekeeper enter to tell me that be in my study and wish to see me immediately . i glance at the clock and see with sun rise that it be only nine . when i enter the room , she be stand on the hearth-rug face me . something in her pose chill me and check the word which be rise to my lip . her veil be half down , but i could see that she be pale and that her expression be constrain . " , " she say , " i have come to tell you that our engagement be at an end . " i stagger . i believe that i literally do stagger . i know that i find myself lean against the bookcase for support . " -- -- -- " i stammer . " this be very sudden , . " " yes , , i have come here to tell you that our engagement be at an end . " " but surely , " i cry , " you will give me some reason ! this be unlike you , . tell me how i have be unfortunate enough to offend you . " " it be all over , . " " but why ? you must be under some delusion , . perhaps you have be tell some falsehood about me . or you may have misunderstand something that i have say to you . only let me know what it be , and a word may set it all right . " " we must consider it all at an end . " " but you leave me last night without a hint at any disagreement . what could have occur in the interval to change you so ? it must have be something that happen last night . you have be think it over and you have disapprove of my conduct . be it the mesmerism ? do you blame me for let that woman exercise her power over you ? you know that at the least sign i should have interfere . " " it be useless , . all be over : " her voice be cold and measured ; her manner strangely formal and hard . it seem to me that she be absolutely resolve not to be draw into any argument or explanation . as for me , i be shake with agitation , and i turn my face aside , so ashamed be i that she should see my want of control . " you must know what this mean to me ! " i cry . " it be the blasting of all my hope and the ruin of my life ! you surely will not inflict such a punishment upon me unheard . you will let me know what be the matter . consider how impossible it would be for me , under any circumstance , to treat you so . for 's sake , , let me know what i have do ! " she walk past me without a word and open the door . " it be quite useless , , " say she . " you must consider our engagement at an end . " an instant later she be go , and , before i could recover myself sufficiently to follow her , i hear the close behind her . i rush into my room to change my coat , with the idea of hurry round to be to learn from her what the cause of my misfortune might be . so shake be i that i could hardly lace my boot . never shall i forget those horrible ten minute . i have just pull on my overcoat when the clock upon the strike ten . ten ! i associate the idea with 's note . it be lie before me on the table , and i tear it open . it be scribble in pencil in a peculiarly angular handwriting . " my [ it say ] : pray excuse the personal nature of the test which i be give you . happen to mention the relation between you and my subject of this evening , and it strike me that nothing could be more convincing to you than if i be to suggest to that she should call upon you at nine morning and suspend your engagement for half an hour or so . be so exact that it be difficult to give a satisfying test , but i be convince that this at least will be an action which she would be most unlikely to do of her own free will . forget any thing that she may have say , as she have really nothing whatever to do with it , and will certainly not recollect any thing about it . i write this note to shorten your anxiety , and to beg you to forgive me for the momentary unhappiness which my suggestion must have cause you . " yours faithfully ; " . really , when i have read the note , i be too relieve to be angry . it be a liberty . certainly it be a very great liberty indeed on the part of a lady whom i have only meet once . but , after all , i have challenge her by my scepticism . it may have be , as she say , a little difficult to devise a test which would satisfy me . and she have do that . there could be no question at all upon the point . for me hypnotic suggestion be finally establish . it take its place from now onward as one of the fact of life . that , who of all woman of my acquaintance have the well balanced mind , have be reduce to a condition of automatism appear to be certain . a person at a distance have work her as an engineer on the shore might guide a torpedo . a second soul have step in , as it be , have push her own aside , and have seize her nervous mechanism , say : " i will work this for half an hour . " and must have be unconscious as she come and as she return . could she make her way in safety through the street in such a state ? i put on my hat and hurried round to see if all be well with her . yes . she be at home . i be show into the drawing-room and find her sit with a book upon her lap . " you be an early visitor , , " say she , smile . " and you have be an even early one , " i answer . she look puzzle . " what do you mean ? " she ask . " you have not be out ? " " no , certainly not . " " , " say i seriously , " would you mind tell me exactly what you have do this morning ? " she laugh at my earnestness . " you have get on your professional look , . see what come of be engage to a man of science . however , i will tell you , though i ca n't imagine what you want to know for . i get up at eight . i breakfast at . i come into this room at ten minute past nine and begin to read the ' memoir of mme . . ' in a few minute i do the french lady the bad compliment of drop to sleep over her page , and i do you , sir , the very flatter one of dream about you . it be only a few minute since i wake up . " " and find yourself where you have be before ? " " why , where else should i find myself ? " " would you mind tell me , , what it be that you dream about me ? it really be not mere curiosity on my part . " " i merely have a vague impression that you come into it . i can recall any thing definite . " " if you have not be out , , how be it that your shoe be dusty ? " a pained look come over her face . " really , , i do not know what be the matter with you this morning . one would almost think that you doubt my word . if my boot be dusty , it must be , of course , that i have put on a pair which the maid have not clean . " it be perfectly evident that she know nothing whatever about the matter , and i reflect that , after all , perhaps it be good that i should not enlighten her . it might frighten her , and could serve no good purpose that i could see . i say no more about it , therefore , and leave shortly afterward to give my lecture . but i be immensely impress . my horizon of scientific possibility have suddenly be enormously extend . i no longer wonder at 's demonic energy and enthusiasm . who would not work hard who have a vast virgin field ready to his hand ? why , i have know the novel shape of a nucleolus , or a trifling peculiarity of striped muscular fibre see under a lens , fill me with exultation . how petty do such research seem when compare with this one which strike at the very root of life and the nature of the soul ! i have always look upon spirit as a product of matter . the brain , i think , secrete the mind , as the liver do the bile . but how can this be when i see mind work from a distance and play upon matter as a musician might upon a violin ? the body do not give rise to the soul , then , but be rather the rough instrument by which the spirit manifest itself . the windmill do not give rise to the wind , but only indicate it . it be oppose to my whole habit of thought , and yet it be undeniably possible and worthy of investigation . and why should i not investigate it ? i see that under yesterday 's date i say : " if i could see something positive and objective , i might be tempt to approach it from the physiological aspect . " well , i have get my test . i shall be as good as my word . the investigation would , i be sure , be of immense interest . some of my colleague might look askance at it , for science be full of unreasoning prejudice , but if have the courage of his conviction , i can afford to have it also . i shall go to him him and to . if she can show us so much , it be probable that she can show us more . @card@ . be , as i have anticipate , very exultant over my conversion , and be also demurely please at the result of her experiment . strange what a silent , colorless creature she be save only when she exercise her power ! even talk about it give her color and life . she seem to take a singular interest in me . i can help observe how her eye follow me about the room . we have the most interesting conversation about her own power . it be just as well to put her view on record , though they can , of course , claim any scientific weight . " you be on the very fringe of the subject , " say she , when i have express wonder at the remarkable instance of suggestion which she have show me . " i have no direct influence upon when she come round to you . i be not even think of her that morning . what i do be to set her mind as i might set the alarum of a clock so that at the hour name it would go off of its own accord . if six month instead of twelve hour have be suggest , it would have be the same . " " and if the suggestion have be to assassinate me ? " " she would most inevitably have do so . " " but this be a terrible power ! " i cry . " it be , as you say , a terrible power , " she answer gravely , " and the more you know of it the more terrible will it seem to you . " " may i ask , " say i , " what you mean when you say that this matter of suggestion be only at the fringe of it ? what do you consider the essential ? " " i have rather not tell you . " i be surprise at the decision of her answer . " you understand , " say i , " that it be not out of curiosity i ask , but in the hope that i may find some scientific explanation for the fact with which you furnish me . " " frankly , , " say she , " i be not at all interested in science , nor do i care whether it can or can classify these power . " " but i be hope -- -- -- " " ah , that be quite another thing . if you make it a personal matter , " say she , with the pleasant of smile , " i shall be only too happy to tell you any thing you wish to know . let me see ; what be it you ask me ? oh , about the further power . wo n't believe in them , but they be quite true all the same . for example , it be possible for an operator to gain complete command over his -- presume that the latter be a good one . without any previous suggestion he may make him do whatever he like . " " without the subject 's knowledge ? " " that depend . if the force be strongly exert , he would know no more about it than do when she come round and frighten you so . or , if the influence be less powerful , he might be conscious of what he be do , but be quite unable to prevent himself from do it . " " would he have lose his own will power , then ? " " it would be by another strong one . " " have you ever exercise this power yourself ? " " several time . " " be your own will so strong , then ? " " well , it do not entirely depend upon that . many have strong will which be not detachable from themselves . the thing be to have the gift of project it into another person and supersede his own . i find that the power vary with my own strength and health . " " practically , you send your soul into another person 's body . " " well , you might put it that way . " " and what do your own body do ? " " it merely feel lethargic . " " well , but be there no danger to your own health ? " i ask . " there might be a little . you have to be careful never to let your own consciousness absolutely go ; otherwise , you might experience some difficulty in find your way back again . you must always preserve the connection , as it be . i be afraid i express myself very badly , , but of course i do n't know how to put these thing in a scientific way . i be just give you my own experience and my own explanation . " well , i read this over now at my leisure , and i marvel at myself ! be this , the man who have win his way to the front by his hard reasoning power and by his devotion to fact ? here i be gravely retail the gossip of a woman who tell me how her soul may be project from her body , and how , while she lie in a lethargy , she can control the action of people at a distance . do i accept it ? certainly not . she must prove and before i yield a point . but if i be still a sceptic , i have at least cease to be a scoffer . we be to have a sit this evening , and she be to try if she can produce any mesmeric effect upon me . if she can , it will make an excellent starting-point for our investigation . no one can accuse me , at any rate , of complicity . if she can , we must try and find some subject who will be like 's wife . be perfectly impervious . @card@ i believe that i be on the threshold of an epoch-making investigation . to have the power of examine these phenomenon from have an organism which will respond , and at the same time a brain which will appreciate and be surely a unique advantage . i be quite sure that would give five year of his life to be as susceptible as i have prove myself to be . there be no one present except and his wife . i be seat with my head lean back , and , standing in front and a little to the left , use the same long , sweeping stroke as with . at each of them a warm current of air seem to strike me , and to suffuse a thrill and glow all through me from head to foot . my eye be fix upon 's face , but as i gaze the feature seem to blur and to fade away . i be conscious only of her own eye look down at me , gray , deep , inscrutable . large they grow and large , until they change suddenly into two mountain lake toward which i seem to be fall with horrible rapidity . i shudder , and as i do so some deep stratum of thought tell me that the shudder represent the rigor which i have observe in . an instant later i strike the surface of the lake , now join into one , and down i go beneath the water with a in my head and a buzz in my ear . down i go , down , down , and then with a swoop up again until i could see the light stream brightly through the green water . i be almost at the surface when the word " ! " ring through my head , and , with a start , i find myself back in the , with lean on her crutch , and , his note book in his hand , peep over her shoulder . no heaviness or weariness be leave behind . on the contrary , though it be only an hour or so since the experiment , i feel so wakeful that i be more incline for my study than my bedroom . i see quite a vista of interesting experiment extend before us , and be all impatience to begin upon them . @card@ . a blank day , as go with and his wife to the ' . have begin and 's " . " what strange , deep water these are ! result , result , the cause an absolute mystery . it be stimulate to the imagination , but i must be on my guard against that . let us have no inference nor deduction , and nothing but solid fact . that the mesmeric trance be true ; that mesmeric suggestion be true ; that i be myself sensitive to this force . that be my present position . i have a large new which shall be devote entirely to scientific detail . long talk with and in the evening about our marriage . we think that the summer vac . ( the beginning of it ) would be the good time for the wedding . why should we delay ? i grudge even those few month . still , as say , there be a good many thing to be arrange . @card@ . mesmerize again by . experience much the same as before , save that insensibility come on more quickly . see for temperature of room , barometric pressure , pulse , and respiration as take by . @card@ . mesmerize again . detail in @card@ . , and a blank day . i grudge any interruption of our experiment . at present they merely embrace the physical sign which go with slight , with complete , and with extreme insensibility . afterward we hope to pass on to the phenomenon of suggestion and of lucidity . professor have demonstrate these thing upon woman at and at the . it will be more convincing when a woman demonstrate it upon a professor , with a second professor as a witness . and that i should be the , the sceptic , the materialist ! at least , i have show that my devotion to science be great than to my own personal consistency . the eating of our own word be the great sacrifice which truth ever require of us . my neighbor , , the handsome young demonstrator of anatomy , come in this evening to return a volume of 's " " which i have lend him . i call him young , but , as a matter of fact , he be a year old than i be . " i understand , , " say he , " that you be be experiment upon by . " " well , " he go on , when i have acknowledge it , " if i be you , i should not let it go any further . you will think me very impertinent , no doubt , but , none the less , i feel it to be my duty to advise you to have no more to do with her . " of course i ask him why . " i be so place that i can enter into particular as freely as i could wish , " say he . " be the friend of my friend , and my position be a delicate one . i can only say this : that i have myself be the subject of some of the woman 's experiment , and that they have leave a most unpleasant impression upon my mind . " he could hardly expect me to be satisfy with that , and i try hard to get something more definite out of him , but without success . be it conceivable that he could be jealous at my have supersede him ? or be he one of those man of science who feel personally injured when fact run counter to their preconceive opinion ? he can seriously suppose that because he have some vague grievance i be , therefore , to abandon a series of experiment which promise to be so fruitful of result . he appear to be annoy at the light way in which i treat his shadowy warning , and we part with some little coldness on both side . @card@ . mesmerize by 1 . mesmerize by ( ) 2 . mesmerize by ( chart take by . ) 3 . it be possible that this course of mesmerism may be a little try to the general constitution . say that i be thin and dark under the eye . i be conscious of a nervous irritability which i have not observe in myself before . the least noise , for example , make me start , and the stupidity of a student cause me exasperation instead of amusement . wish me to stop , but i tell her that every course of study be try , and that one can never attain a result with out pay some price for it . when she see the sensation which my forthcoming paper on " the relation between and " may make , she will understand that it be worth a little nervous wear and tear . i should not be surprise if i get my over it . mesmerize again in the evening . the effect be produce more rapidly now , and the subjective vision be less marked . i keep full note of each sitting . be leave for town for a week or ten day , but we shall not interrupt the experiment , which depend for their value as much upon my sensation as on his observation . 4 . i must be carefully on my guard . a complication have creep into our experiment which i have not reckon upon . in my eagerness for scientific fact i have be foolishly blind to the human relation between and myself . i can write here what i would not breathe to a live soul . the unhappy woman appear to have form an attachment for me . i should not say such a thing , even in the privacy of my own intimate journal , if it have not come to such a pass that it be impossible to ignore it . for some time , -- be , for the last week , -- have be sign which i have brush aside and refuse to think of . her brightness when i come , her dejection when i go , her eagerness that i should come often , the expression of her eye , the tone of her try to think that they mean nothing , and be , perhaps , only her ardent west indian manner . but last night , as i awake from the mesmeric sleep , i put out my hand , unconsciously , involuntarily , and clasp hers . when i come fully to myself , we be sit with them lock , she look up at me with an expectant smile . and the horrible thing be that i feel impel to say what she expect me to say . what a false wretch i should have be ! how i should have loathe myself have i yield to the temptation of that moment ! but , thank , i be strong enough to spring up and hurry from the room . i be rude , i fear , but i could not , no , not , trust myself another moment . i , a gentleman , a man of honor , engage to one of the sweet girl in yet in a moment of reasonless passion i nearly profess love for this woman whom i hardly know . she be far old than myself and a cripple . it be monstrous , odious ; and yet the impulse be so strong that , have i stay another minute in her presence , i should have commit myself . what be it ? i have to teach other the working of our organism , and what do i know of it myself ? be it the sudden of some low stratum in my brutal primitive instinct suddenly assert itself ? i could almost believe the tale of obsession by evil spirit , so overmaster be the feeling . well , the incident place me in a most unfortunate position . on the one hand , i be very loath to abandon a series of experiment which have already go so far , and which promise such brilliant result . on the other , if this unhappy woman have conceive a passion for me -- -- -- but surely even now i must have make some hideous mistake . she , with her age and her deformity ! it be impossible . and then she know about . she understand how i be place . she only smile out of amusement , perhaps , when in my daze state i seize her hand . it be my brain which give it a meaning , and spring with such bestial swiftness to meet it . i wish i could persuade myself that it be indeed so . on the whole , perhaps , my wise plan would be to postpone our other experiment until 's return . i have write a note to , therefore , make no allusion to last night , but say that a press of work would cause me to interrupt our sitting for a few day . she have answer , formally enough , to say that if i should change my mind i should find her at home at the usual hour . @card@ , well , what a thing of straw i be ! i be come to know myself good of late , and the more i know the low i fall in my own estimation . surely i be not always so weak as this . at four o'clock i should have smile have any one tell me that i should go to 's , and yet , at eight , i be at 's door as usual . i do n't know how it occur . the influence of habit , i suppose . perhaps there be a mesmeric craze as there be an opium craze , and i be a victim to it . i only know that as i work in my study i become more and more uneasy . i fidget . i worry . i could not concentrate my mind upon the paper in front of me . and then , at last , almost before i know what i be do , i seize my hat and hurried round to keep my usual appointment . we have an interesting evening . be present during most of the time , which prevent the embarrassment which one at least of us must have feel . 's manner be quite the same as usual , and she express no surprise at my have come in spite of my note . there be nothing in her bearing to show that yesterday 's incident have make any impression upon her , and so i be incline to hope that i overrate it . 6 ( evening ) . no , no , no , i do not overrate it . i can no longer attempt to conceal from myself that this woman have conceive a passion for me . it be monstrous , but it be true . again , tonight , i awake from the mesmeric trance to find my hand in hers , and to suffer that odious feeling which urge me to throw away my honor , my career , every thing , for the sake of this creature who , as i can plainly see when i be away from her influence , possess no single charm upon earth . but when i be near her , i do not feel this . she rouse something in me , something evil , something i have rather not think of . she paralyze my good nature , too , at the moment when she stimulate my bad . decidedly it be not good for me to be near her . last night be bad than before . instead of fly i actually sit for some time with my hand in hers talk over the most intimate subject with her . we speak of , among other thing . what could i have be dream of ? say that she be conventional , and i agree with her . she speak once or twice in a disparage way of her , and i do not protest . what a creature i have be ! weak as i have prove myself to be , i be still strong enough to bring this sort of thing to an end . it shall not happen again . i have sense enough to fly when i can fight . from this night onward i shall never sit with again . never ! let the experiment go , let the research come to an end ; any thing be good than face this monstrous temptation which drag me so low . i have say nothing to , but i shall simply stay away . she can tell the reason without any word of mine . 7 . have stay away as i say . it be a pity to ruin such an interesting investigation , but it would be a great pity still to ruin my life , and i that i can trust myself with that woman . @card@ help me ! what be the matter with me ? be i go mad ? let me try and be calm and reason with myself . first of all i shall set down exactly what occur . it be nearly eight when i write the line with which this day begin . feel strangely restless and uneasy , i leave my room and walk round to spend the evening with and her mother . they both remark that i be pale and haggard . about nine come in , and we play a game of whist . i try hard to concentrate my attention upon the card , but the feeling of restlessness grow and grow until i find it impossible to struggle against it . i simply not sit still at the table . at last , in the very middle of a hand , i throw my card down and , with some sort of an incoherent apology about have an appointment , i rush from the room . as if in a dream i have a vague recollection of tear through the hall , snatch my hat from the stand , and slam the door behind me . as in a dream , too , i have the impression of the double line of , and my bespatter boot tell me that i must have run down the middle of the road . it be all misty and strange and unnatural . i come to 's house ; i see and i see . i hardly recall what we talk about , but i do remember that shake the head of her crutch at me in a playful way , and accuse me of be late and of lose interest in our experiment . there be no mesmerism , but i stay some time and have only just return . my brain be quite clear again now , and i can think over what have occur . it be absurd to suppose that it be merely weakness and force of habit . i try to explain it in that way the other night , but it will no longer suffice . it be something much deeper and more terrible than that . why , when i be at the ' , i be drag away as if the noose of a rope have be cast round me . i can no longer disguise it from myself . the woman have her grip upon me . i be in her clutch . but i must keep my head and reason it out and see what be good to be do . but what a blind fool i have be ! in my enthusiasm over my research i have walk straight into the pit , although it lie gape before me . do she not herself warn me ? do she not tell me , as i can read in my own journal , that when she have acquire power over a subject she can make him do her will ? and she have acquire that power over me . i be for the moment at the beck and call of this creature with the crutch . i must come when she will it . i must do as she will . bad of all , i must feel as she will . i loathe her and fear her , yet , while i be under the spell , she can doubtless make me love her . there be some consolation in the thought , then , that those odious impulse for which i have blame myself do not really come from me at all . they be all transfer from her , little as i could have guess it at the time . i feel clean and light for the thought . 8 . yes , now , in broad daylight , write coolly and with time for reflection , i be compel to confirm every thing which i write in my journal last night . i be in a horrible position , but , above all , i must not lose my head . i must pit my intellect against her power . after all , i be no silly puppet , to dance at the end of a string . i have energy , brain , courage . for all her devil 's trick i may beat her yet . ! , or what be to become of me ? let me try to reason it out ! this woman , by her own explanation , can dominate my nervous organism . she can project herself into my body and take command of it . she have a parasite soul ; yes , she be a parasite , a monstrous parasite . she creep into my frame as the hermit crab do into the whelk 's shell . i be powerless what can i do ? i be deal with force of which i know nothing . and i can tell no one of my trouble . they would set me down as a madman . certainly , if it get noise abroad , the university would say that they have no need of a professor . and ! no , no , i must face it alone . i read over my note of what the woman say when she speak about her power . there be one point which fill me with dismay . she imply that when the influence be slight the subject know what he be do , but can control himself , whereas when it be strongly exert he be absolutely unconscious . now , i have always know what i do , though less so last night than on the previous occasion . that seem to mean that she have never yet exert her full power upon me . be ever a man so place before ? yes , perhaps there be , and very near me , too . must know something of this ! his vague word of warn take a meaning now . oh , if i have only listen to him then , before i help by these repeated sitting to forge the link of the chain which bind me ! but i will see him . i will apologize to him for have treat his warning so lightly . i will see if he can advise me . 4 , he can . i have talk with him , and he show such surprise at the first word in which i try to express my unspeakable secret that i go no further . as far as i can gather ( by hint and inference rather than by any statement ) , his own experience be limit to some word or look such as i have myself endure . his abandonment of be in itself a sign that he be never really in her toil . oh , if he only know his escape ! he have to thank his phlegmatic saxon temperament for it . i be black and celtic , and this hag 's clutch be deep in my nerve . shall i ever get it out ? shall i ever be the same man that i be just one short fortnight ago ? let me consider what i have well do . i can leave the university in the middle of the term . if i be free , my course would be obvious . i should start at once and travel in . but would she allow me to start ? and could her influence not reach me in , and bring me back to within touch of her crutch ? i can only find out the limit of this hellish power by my own bitter experience . i will fight and fight and what can i do more ? i know very well that about eight o'clock that craving for her society , that irresistible restlessness , will come upon me . how shall i overcome it ? what shall i do ? i must make it impossible for me to leave the room . i shall lock the door and throw the key out of the window . but , then , what be i to do in the morning ? never mind about the morning . i must at all cost break this chain which hold me . 9 . victory ! i have do splendidly ! at seven o'clock last night i take a hasty dinner , and then lock myself up in my bedroom and drop the key into the garden . i choose a cheery novel , and lie in bed for three hour try to read it , but really in a horrible state of trepidation , expect every instant that i should become conscious of the impulse . nothing of the sort occur , however , and i awake this morning with the feeling that a black nightmare have be lift off me . perhaps the creature realize what i have do , and understand that it be useless to try to influence me . at any rate , i have beat her once , and if i can do it once , i can do it again . it be most awkward about the key in the morning . luckily , there be an below , and i ask him to throw it up . no doubt he think i have just drop it . i will have door and window screw up and six stout man to hold me down in my bed before i will surrender myself to be hag-ridden in this way . i have a note from this afternoon ask me to go round and see her . i intend to do so in any case , but have not except to find bad news wait for me . it seem that the armstrong , from whom have expectation , be due home from in the , and that they have write to and her to meet them in town . they will probably be away for a month or six week , and , as the be due on , they must go at , if they be ready in time . my consolation be that when we meet again there will be no more parting between and me . " i want you to do one thing , , " say i , when we be alone together . " if you should happen to meet , either in town or here , you must promise me never again to allow her to mesmerize you . " open her eye . " why , it be only the other day that you be say how interesting it all be , and how determined you be to finish your experiment . " " i know , but i have change my mind since then . " " and you wo n't have it any more ? " " no. " " i be so glad , . you ca n't think how pale and worn you have be lately . it be really our principal objection to go to now that we do not wish to leave you when you be so pull down . and your manner have be so strange that night when you leave poor to play dummy . i be convince that these experiment be very bad for your nerve . " " i think so , too , dear . " " and for 's nerve as well . you have hear that she be ill ? " " no. " " tell us so last night . she describe it as a nervous fever . be come back this week , and of course be very anxious that should be well again then , for he have quite a programme of experiment which he be anxious to carry out . " i be glad to have 's promise , for it be enough that this woman should have one of us in her clutch . on the other hand , i be disturb to hear about 's illness . it rather discount the victory which i appear to win last night . i remember that she say that loss of health interfere with her power . that may be why i be able to hold my own so easily . well , well , i must take the same precaution and see what come of it . i be childishly frighten when i think of her . @card@ . all go very well last night . i be amuse at the gardener 's face when i have again to hail him this morning and to ask him to throw up my key . i shall get a name among the servant if this sort of thing go on . but the great point be that i stay in my room without the slight inclination to leave it . i do believe that i be shake myself clear of this incredible be it only that the woman 's power be in abeyance until she recover her strength ? i can but pray for the good . the leave this morning , and the brightness seem to have go out of the spring sunshine . and yet it be very beautiful also as it gleam on the green chestnut opposite my window , and give a touch of to the heavy , wall of the old college . how sweet and gentle and soothing be nature ! who would think that there lurk in her also such vile force , such odious possibility ! for of course i understand that this dreadful thing which have spring out at me be neither supernatural nor even preternatural . no , it be a natural force which this woman can use and society be ignorant of . the mere fact that it ebb with her strength show how entirely it be subject to physical law . if i have time , i might probe it to the bottom and lay my hand upon its antidote . but you can tame the tiger when you be beneath his claw . you can but try to writhe away from him . ah , when i look in the glass and see my own dark eye and clear-cut spanish face , i long for a vitriol splash or a bout of the . one or the other might have save me from this calamity . i be incline to think that i may have trouble . there be two thing which make me fear so . one be that i meet in the street , and that she tell me that be good , though still weak . i find myself wish in my heart that the illness have be her last . the other be that come back in a day or two , and his presence would act as a constraint upon her . i should not fear our interview if a third person be present . for both these reason i have a presentiment of trouble , and i shall take the same precaution as before . @card@ . no , thank , all go well last night . i really could not face the gardener again . i lock my door and thrust the key underneath it , so that i have to ask the maid to let me out in the morning . but the precaution be really not need , for i never have any inclination to go out at all . three evening in succession at home ! i be surely near the end of my trouble , for will be home again either today or tomorrow . shall i tell him of what i have go through or not ? i be convince that i should not have the slight sympathy from him . he would look upon me as an interesting case , and read a paper about me at the next meeting of the , in which he would gravely discuss the possibility of my be a deliberate liar , and weigh it against the chance of my be in an early stage of lunacy . no , i shall get no comfort out of . i be feel wonderfully fit and well . i do n't think i ever lecture with great spirit . oh , if i could only get this shadow off my life , how happy i should be ! , fairly wealthy , in the front rank of my profession , engage to a beautiful and charming i not every thing which a man could ask for ? only one thing to trouble me , but what a thing it be ! midnight . i shall go mad . yes , that will be the end of it . i shall go mad . i be not far from it now . my head throb as i rest it on my hot hand . i be quiver all over like a scared horse . oh , what a night i have have ! and yet i have some cause to be satisfy also . at the risk of become the laughing-stock of my own servant , i again slip my key under the door , imprison myself for the night . then , find it too early to go to bed , i lie down with my clothes on and begin to read one of 's novel . suddenly i be and drag from the couch . it be only thus that i can describe the overpowering nature of the force which pounce upon me . i claw at the coverlet . i cling to the . i believe that i scream out in my frenzy . it be all useless , hopeless . go . there be no way out of it . it be only at the outset that i resist . the force soon become too overmaster for that . i thank goodness that there be no watcher there to interfere with me . i could not have answer for myself if there have be . and , besides the determination to get out , there come to me , also , the keen and cool judgment in choose my mean . i light a candle and endeavor , kneel in front of the door , to pull the key through with the of a quill pen . it be just too short and push it further away . then with quiet persistence i get a paper-knife out of one of the drawers , and with that i manage to draw the key back . i open the door , step into my study , take a photograph of myself from the bureau , write something across it , place it in the inside pocket of my coat , and then start off for 's . it be all wonderfully clear , and yet disassociate from the rest of my life , as the incident of even the most vivid dream might be . a peculiar double consciousness possess me . there be the predominant alien will , which be bend upon draw me to the side of its owner , and there be the feeble protest personality , which i recognize as be myself , tug feebly at the overmaster impulse as a lead terrier might at its chain . i can remember recognize these two conflicting force , but i recall nothing of my walk , nor of how i be admit to the house . very vivid , however , be my recollection of how i meet . she be recline on the sofa in the little boudoir in which our experiment have usually be carry out . her head be rest on her hand , and a rug have be partly draw over her . she look up expectantly as i enter , and , as the fall upon her face , i could see that she be very pale and thin , with dark hollow under her eye . she smile at me , and point to a stool beside her . it be with her left hand that she point , and i , run eagerly forward , seize it , -- loathe myself as i think of it , -- press it passionately to my lip . then , seat myself upon the stool , and still retain her hand , i give her the photograph which i have bring with me , and talk and talk and my love for her , of my grief over her illness , of my joy at her recovery , of the misery it be to me to be absent a single evening from her side . she lie quietly look down at me with imperious eye and her provocative smile . once i remember that she pass her hand over my hair as one caress a dog ; and it give me caress . i thrill under it . i be her slave , body and soul , and for the moment i rejoice in my slavery . and then come the blessed change . never tell me that there be not a ! i be on the brink of perdition . my foot be on the edge . be it a coincidence that at that very instant help should come ? no , no , no ; there be a , and its hand have draw me back . there be something in the universe strong than this devil woman with her trick . ah , what a balm to my heart it be to think so ! as i look up at her i be conscious of a change in her . her face , which have be pale before , be now ghastly . her eye be dull , and the lid droop heavily over them . above all , the look of serene confidence have go from her feature . her mouth have weaken . her forehead have pucker . she be frightened and undecided . and as i watch the change my own spirit flutter and struggle , try hard to tear itself from the grip which hold grip which , from moment to moment , grow less secure . " , " she whisper , " i have try to do too much . i be not strong enough . i have not recover yet from my illness . but i could not live longer without see you . you wo n't leave me , ? this be only a pass weakness . if you will only give me five minute , i shall be myself again . give me the small decanter from the table in the window . " but i have regain my soul . with her wane strength the influence have clear away from me and leave me free . and i be , fiercely aggressive . for once at least i could make this woman understand what my real feeling toward her be . my soul be fill with a hatred as bestial as the love against which it be a reaction . it be the savage , murderous passion of the revolt serf . i could have take the crutch from her side and beat her face in with it . she throw her hand up , as if to avoid a blow , and cower away from me into the corner of the settee . " the brandy ! " she gasp . " the brandy ! " i take the decanter and pour it over the root of a palm in the window . then i snatch the photograph from her hand and tear it into a hundred piece . " you vile woman , " i say , " if i do my duty to society , you would never leave this room alive ! " " i love you , ; i love you ! " she wail . " yes , " i cry , " and before . and how many other before that ? " " ! " she gasp . " he have speak to you ? so , , ! " her voice come through her white lip like a snake 's hiss . " yes , i know you , and other shall know you , too . you shameless creature ! you know how i stand . and yet you use your vile power to bring me to your side . you may , perhaps , do so again , but at least you will remember that you have hear me say that i love from the bottom of my soul , and that i loathe you , abhor you ! " the very sight of you and the sound of your voice fill me with horror and disgust . the thought of you be repulsive . that be how i feel toward you , and if it please you by your trick to draw me again to your side as you have do , you will at least , i should think , have little satisfaction in try to make a lover out of a man who have tell you his real opinion of you . you may put what word you will into my mouth , but you can help remember -- -- -- " i stop , for the woman 's head have fall back , and she have faint . she could not bear to hear what i have to say to her ! what a glow of satisfaction it give me to think that , come what may , in the future she can never misunderstand my true feeling toward her . but what will occur in the future ? what will she do next ? i dare not think of it . oh , if only i could hope that she will leave me alone ! but when i think of what i say to her -- -- -- never mind ; i have be strong than she for once . @card@ . i hardly sleep last night , and find myself in the morning so unstrung and feverish that i be compel to ask to do my lecture for me . it be the first that i have ever miss . i rise at , but my head be ache , my hand quiver , and my nerve in a pitiable state . who should come round this evening but . he have just come back from , where he have lecture , read paper , convene meeting , expose a medium , conduct a series of experiment on thought transference , entertain of , spend hour gaze into a crystal , and obtain some evidence as to the passage of matter through matter . all this he pour into my ear in a single gust . " but you ! " he cry at last . " you be not look well . and be quite prostrate . how about the experiment ? " " i have abandon them . " " tut , tut ! why ? " " the subject seem to me to be a dangerous one . " out come his big brown . " this be of great interest , " say he . " what be your ground for say that it be a dangerous one ? please give your fact in chronological order , with approximate date and name of reliable witness with their permanent address . " " first of all , " i ask , " would you tell me whether you have collect any case where the mesmerist have gain a command over the subject and have use it for evil purpose ? " " dozen ! " he cry exultantly . " crime by suggestion -- -- -- " " i do n't mean suggestion . i mean where a sudden impulse come from a person at a uncontrollable impulse . " " obsession ! " he shriek , in an ecstasy of delight . " it be the rare condition . we have eight case , five well attest . you do n't mean to say -- -- -- " his exultation make him hardly articulate . " no , i do n't , " say " ! you will excuse me , but i be not very well . " and so at last i get rid of him , still brandish his pencil and his . my trouble may be bad to hear , but at least it be good to hug them to myself than to have myself exhibit by , like a freak at a fair . he have lose sight of human being . every thing to him be a case and a phenomenon . i will die before i speak to him again upon the matter . @card@ . yesterday be a bless day of quiet , and i enjoy an uneventful night . 's presence be a great consolation . what can the woman do now ? surely , when she have hear me say what i have say , she will conceive the same disgust for me which i have for her . she could not , no , she not , desire to have a lover who have insult her so . no , i believe i be free from her how about her hate ? might she not use these power of hers for revenge ? tut ! why should i frighten myself over shadow ? she will forget about me , and i shall forget about her , and all will be well . @card@ . my nerve have quite recover their tone . i really believe that i have conquer the creature . but i must confess to live in some suspense . she be well again , for i hear that she be drive with in the in the afternoon . @card@ . i do wish i could get away from the place altogether . i shall fly to 's side the very day that the term close . i suppose it be pitiably weak of me , but this woman get upon my nerve most terribly . i have see her again , and i have speak with her . it be just after lunch , and i be smoke a cigarette in my study , when i hear the step of my servant in the passage . i be languidly conscious that a second step be audible behind , and have hardly trouble myself to speculate who it might be , when suddenly a slight noise bring me out of my chair with my skin creep with apprehension . i have never particularly observe before what sort of sound the tap of a crutch be , but my quiver nerve tell me that i hear it now in the sharp wooden clack which alternate with the muffle thud of the foot fall . another instant and my servant have show her in . i do not attempt the usual convention of society , nor do she . i simply stand with the smoulder cigarette in my hand , and gaze at her . she in her turn look silently at me , and at her look i remember how in these very page i have try to define the expression of her eye , whether they be furtive or fierce . they be and inexorably so . " well , " say she at last , " be you still of the same mind as when i see you last ? " " i have always be of the same mind . " " let us understand each other , , " say she slowly . " i be not a very safe person to trifle with , as you should realize by now . it be you who ask me to enter into a series of experiment with you , it be you who win my affection , it be you who profess your love for me , it be you who bring me your own photograph with word of affection upon it , and , finally , it be you who on the very same evening think fit to insult me most outrageously , address me as no man have ever dare to speak to me yet . tell me that those word come from you in a moment of passion and i be prepare to forget and to forgive them . you do not mean what you say , ? you do not really hate me ? " i might have pity this deformed a longing for love break suddenly through the menace of her eye . but then i think of what i have go through , and my heart set like flint . " if ever you hear me speak of love , " say i , " you know very well that it be your voice which speak , and not mine . the only word of truth which i have ever be able to say to you be those which you hear when last we meet . " " i know . some one have set you against me . it be he ! " she tap with her crutch upon the floor . " well , you know very well that i could bring you this instant crouch like a spaniel to my foot . you will not find me again in my hour of weakness , when you can insult me with impunity . have a care what you be do , . you stand in a terrible position . you have not yet realize the hold which i have upon you . " i shrug my shoulder and turn away . " well , " say she , after a pause , " if you despise my love , i must see what can be do with fear . you smile , but the day will come when you will come scream to me for pardon . yes , you will grovel on the ground before me , proud as you be , and you will curse the day that ever you turn me from your good friend into your most bitter enemy . have a care , ! " i see a white hand shake in the air , and a face which be scarcely human , so convulse be it with passion . an instant later she be go , and i hear the quick hobble and tap recede down the passage . but she have leave a weight upon my heart . vague presentiment of come misfortune lie heavy upon me . i try in vain to persuade myself that these be only word of empty anger . i can remember those relentless eye too clearly to think so . what shall i , what shall i do ? i be no long master of my own soul . at any moment this loathsome parasite may creep into me , and then -- -- -- i must tell some one my hideous must tell it or go mad . if i have some one to sympathize and advise ! be out of the question . would understand me only so far as his own experience carry him . ! he be a well-balanced man , a man of great common-sense and resource . i will go to him . i will tell him every thing . grant that he may be able to advise me ! @card@ , it be useless . there be no human help for me ; i must fight this out single-handed . two course lie before me . i might become this woman 's lover . or i must endure such persecution as she can inflict upon me . even if none come , i shall live in a hell of apprehension . but she may torture me , she may drive me mad , she may kill me : i will never , never , never give in . what can she inflict which would be bad than the loss of , and the knowledge that i be a perjured liar , and have forfeit the name of gentleman ? be most amiable , and listen with all politeness to my story . but when i look at his heavy set feature , his slow eye , and the ponderous study furniture which surround him , i could hardly tell him what i have come to say . it be all so substantial , so material . and , besides , what would i myself have say a short month ago if one of my colleague have come to me with a story of demonic possession ? perhaps . i should have be less patient than he be . as it be , he take note of my statement , ask me how much tea i drink , how many hour i sleep , whether i have be overwork much , have i have sudden pain in the head , evil dream , sing in the ear , flash before the question which point to his belief that brain congestion be at the bottom of my trouble . finally he dismiss me with a great many platitude about open-air exercise , and avoidance of nervous excitement . his prescription , which be for chloral and bromide , i roll up and throw into the gutter . no , i can look for no help from any human be . if i consult any more , they may put their head together and i may find myself in an asylum . i can but grip my courage with both hand , and pray that an honest man may not be abandon . @card@ . it be the sweet spring within the memory of man . so green , so mild , so beautiful ! ah , what a contrast between nature without and my own soul so tear with doubt and terror ! it have be an uneventful day , but i know that i be on the edge of an abyss . i know it , and yet i go on with the routine of my life . the one bright spot be that be happy and well and out of all danger . if this creature have a hand on each of us , what might she not do ? @card@ . the woman be ingenious in her torment . she know how fond i be of my work , and how highly my lecture be think of . so it be from that point that she now attack me . it will end , i can see , in my lose my professorship , but i will fight to the finish . she shall not drive me out of it without a struggle . i be not conscious of any change during my lecture this morning save that for a minute or two i have a dizziness and which rapidly pass away . on the contrary , i congratulate myself upon have make my subject ( the function of the red corpuscle ) both interesting and clear . i be surprise , therefore , when a student come into my laboratory immediately after the lecture , and complain of be puzzle by the discrepancy between my statement and those in the text book . he show me his , in which i be report as have in one portion of the lecture champion the most outrageous and unscientific heresy . of course i deny it , and declare that he have misunderstand me , but on compare his note with those of his companion , it become clear that he be right , and that i really have make some most preposterous statement . of course i shall explain it away as be the result of a moment of aberration , but i feel only too sure that it will be the first of a series . it be but a month now to the end of the session , and i pray that i may be able to hold out until then . @card@ . ten day have elapse since i have have the heart to make any entry in my journal . why should i record my own humiliation and degradation ? i have vow never to open it again . and yet the force of habit be strong , and here i find myself take up once more the record of my own dreadful much the same spirit in which a suicide have be know to take note of the effect of the poison which kill him . well , the crash which i have foresee have that no further back than yesterday . the university authority have take my lectureship from me . it have be do in the most delicate way , purport to be a temporary measure to relieve me from the effect of overwork , and to give me the opportunity of recover my health . none the less , it have be do , and i be no long . the laboratory be still in my charge , but i have little doubt that that also will soon go . the fact be that my lecture have become the laughing-stock of the university . my class be crowd with student who come to see and hear what the eccentric professor would do or say next . i can go into the detail of my humiliation . oh , that devilish woman ! there be no depth of buffoonery and imbecility to which she have not force me . i would begin my lecture clearly and well , but always with the sense of a come eclipse . then as i feel the influence i would struggle against it , strive with clench hand and bead of sweat upon my brow to get the good of it , while the student , hear my incoherent word and watch my contortion , would roar with laughter at the antic of their professor . and then , when she have once fairly master me , out would come the most outrageous joke , sentiment as though i be propose a toast , snatch of ballad , personal abuse even against some member of my class . and then in a moment my brain would clear again , and my lecture would proceed decorously to the end . no wonder that my conduct have be the talk of the college . no wonder that the have be compel to take official notice of such a scandal . oh , that devilish woman ! and the most dreadful part of it all be my own loneliness . here i sit in a commonplace english , look out upon a commonplace english street with its garish ' bus and its lounge policeman , and behind me there hang a shadow which be out of all keep with the age and place . in the home of knowledge i be weigh down and torture by a power of which science know nothing . no magistrate would listen to me . no paper would discuss my case . no doctor would believe my symptom . my own most intimate friend would only look upon it as a sign of brain derangement . i be out of all touch with my kind . oh , that devilish woman ! let her have a care ! she may push me too far . when the law can help a man , he may make a law for himself . she meet me in the yesterday evening and speak to me . it be as well for her , perhaps , that it be not between the hedge of a lonely country road . she ask me with her cold smile whether i have be chasten yet . i do not deign to answer her . " we must try another turn of the screw ; " say she . have a care , my lady , have a care ! i have her at my mercy once . perhaps another chance may come . @card@ . the suspension of my lectureship have have the effect also of take away her mean of annoy me , and so i have enjoy two blessed day of peace . after all , there be no reason to despair . sympathy pour in to me from all side , and every one agree that it be my devotion to science and the arduous nature of my research which have shake my nervous system . i have have the kind message from the council advise me to travel abroad , and express the confident hope that i may be able to resume all my duty by the beginning of the summer term . nothing could be more flatter than their allusion to my career and to my service to the university . it be only in misfortune that one can test one 's own popularity . this creature may weary of torment me , and then all may yet be well . grant it ! @card@ . our sleepy little town have have a small sensation . the only knowledge of crime which we ever have be when a rowdy undergraduate break a few lamp or come to blow with a policeman . last night , however , there be an attempt make to the branch of the of , and we be all in a flutter in consequence . , the manager , be an intimate friend of mine , and i find him very much excite when i walk round there after breakfast . have the thief break into the counting-house , they would still have have the safe to reckon with , so that the defence be considerably strong than the attack . indeed , the latter do not appear to have ever be very formidable . two of the low window have mark as if a chisel or some such instrument have be push under them to force them open . the police should have a good clue , for the have be do with green paint only the day before , and from the smear it be evident that some of it have find its way on to the criminal 's hand or clothes . @card@ ah , that accursed woman ! that thrice accursed woman ! never mind ! she shall not beat me ! no , she shall not ! but , oh , the ! she have take my professorship . now she would take my honor . be there nothing i can do against her , nothing save -- -- -- ah , but , hard push as i be , i can bring myself to think of that ! it be about an hour ago that i go into my bedroom , and be brush my hair before the glass , when suddenly my eye light upon something which leave me so sick and cold that i sit down upon the edge of the bed and begin to cry . it be many a long year since i shed tear , but all my nerve be go , and i could but sob and sob in impotent grief and anger . there be my house jacket , the coat i usually wear after dinner , hang on its peg by the wardrobe , with the right sleeve thickly crust from wrist to elbow with daub of green paint . so this be what she mean by another turn of the screw ! she have make a public imbecile of me . now she would brand me as a criminal . this time she have fail . but how about the next ? i dare not think of of and my poor old mother ! i wish that i be dead ! yes , this be the other turn of the screw . and this be also what she mean , no doubt , when she say that i have not realize yet the power she have over me . i look back at my account of my conversation with her , and i see how she declare that with a slight exertion of her will her subject would be conscious , and with a strong one unconscious . last night i be unconscious . i could have swear that i sleep soundly in my bed without so much as a dream . and yet those stain tell me that i dress , make my way out , attempt to open the bank window , and return . be i observe ? be it possible that some one see me do it and follow me home ? ah , what a hell my life have become ! i have no peace , no rest . but my patience be near its end . @card@ i have clean my coat with turpentine . i do not think that any one could have see me . it be with my screw-driver that i make the mark . i find it all crust with paint , and i have clean it . my head ache as if it would burst , and i have take five grain of antipyrine . if it be not for , i should have take fifty and have an end of it . 3 . three quiet day . this hell fiend be like a cat with a mouse . she let me loose only to pounce upon me again . i be never so frightened as when every thing be still . my physical state be hiccough and ptosis of the left eyelid . i have hear from the that they will be back the day after . i do not know whether i be glad or sorry . they be safe in . once here they may be draw into the miserable network in which i be myself struggle . and i must tell them of it . i can marry so long as i know that i be not responsible for my own action . yes , i must tell them , even if it bring every thing to an end between us . be the university ball , and i must go . know i never feel less in the humor for festivity , but i must not have it say that i be unfit to appear in public . if i be see there , and have speech with some of the elder of the university it will go a long way toward show them that it would be unjust to take my chair away from me . @card@ i have be to the ball . and i go together , but i have come away before him . i shall wait up for him , however , for , indeed , i fear to go to sleep these night . he be a cheery , practical fellow , and a chat with him will steady my nerve . on the whole , the evening be a great success . i talk to every one who have influence , and i think that i make them realize that my chair be not vacant quite yet . the creature be at the to dance , of course , but sit with . again and again her eye rest upon me . they be almost the last thing i see before i leave the room . once , as i sit sideways to her , i watch her , and see that her gaze be follow some one else . it be , who be dance at the time with the second . to judge by her expression , it be well for him that he be not in her grip as i be . he do not know the escape he have have . i think i hear his step in the street now , and i will go down and let him in . if he will -- -- -- 4 . why do i break off in this way last night ? i never go down stair , after least , i have no recollection of do so . but , on the other hand , i can remember go to bed . one of my hand be greatly swell this morning , and yet i have no remembrance of injure it yesterday . otherwise , i be feel all the good for last night 's festivity . but i can understand how it be that i do not meet when i so fully intend to do so . be it possible -- -- -- , it be only too probable ! have she be lead me some devil 's dance again ? i will go down to and ask him . . the thing have come to a crisis . my life be not worth living . but , if i be to die , then she shall come also . i will not leave her behind , to drive some other man mad as she have me . no , i have come to the limit of my endurance . she have make me as desperate and dangerous a man as walk the earth . know i have never have the heart to hurt a fly , and yet , if i have my hand now upon that woman , she should never leave this room alive . i shall see her this very day , and she shall learn what she have to expect from me . i go to and find him , to my surprise , in bed . as i enter he sit up and turn a face toward me which sicken me as i look at it . " why , , what have happen ? " i cry , but my heart turn cold as i say it . " , " he answer , mumble with his swollen lip , " i have for some week be under the impression that you be a madman . now i know it , and that you be a dangerous one as well . if it be not that i be unwilling to make a scandal in the college , you would now be in the hand of the police . " " do you mean -- -- -- " i cry . " i mean that as i open the door last night you rush out upon me , strike me with both your fist in the face , knock me down , kick me furiously in the side , and leave me lie almost unconscious in the street . look at your own hand bear witness against you . " yes , there it be , puff up , with knuckle , as after some terrific blow . what could i do ? though he put me down as a madman , i must tell him all . i sit by his bed and go over all my trouble from the beginning . i pour them out with quiver hand and burning word which might have carry conviction to the most sceptical . " she hate you and she hate me ! " i cry . " she revenge herself last night on both of us at once . she see me leave the ball , and she must have see you also . she know how long it would take you to reach home . then she have but to use her wicked will . ah , your bruise face be a small thing beside my bruise soul ! " he be strike by my story . that be evident . " yes , yes , she watch me out of the room , " he mutter . " she be capable of it . but be it possible that she have really reduce you to this ? what do you intend to do ? " " to stop it ! " i cry . " i be perfectly desperate ; i shall give her fair warning , and the next time will be the last . " " do nothing rash , " say he . " rash ! " i cry . " the only rash thing be that i should postpone it another hour . " with that i rush to my room , and here i be on the eve of what may be the great crisis of my life . i shall start at once . i have gain one thing , for i have make one man , at least , realize the truth of this monstrous experience of mine . and , if the bad should happen , this diary remain as a proof of the goad that have drive me . evening . when i come to 's , i be show up , and find that he be sit with . for half an hour i have to endure his fussy talk about his recent research into the exact nature of the spiritualistic rap , while the creature and i sit in silence look across the room at each other . i read a sinister amusement in her eye , and she must have see hatred and menace in mine . i have almost despair of have speech with her when he be call from the room , and we be leave for a few moment together . " well , be it ? " say she , with that bitter smile of hers . " how be your friend after the ball ? " " you fiend ! " i cry . " you have come to the end of your trick now . i will have no more of them . listen to what i say . " i stride across and shake her roughly by the shoulder " as sure as there be a in heaven , i swear that if you try another of your deviltry upon me i will have your life for it . come what may , i will have your life . i have come to the end of what a man can endure . " " account be not quite settle between us , " say she , with a passion that equal my own . " i can love , and i can hate . you have your choice . you choose to spurn the first ; now you must test the other . it will take a little more to break your spirit , i see , but break it shall be . come back , as i understand . " " what have that to do with you ? " i cry . " it be a pollution that you should dare even to think of her . if i think that you would harm her -- -- -- " she be frighten , i could see , though she try to brazen it out . she read the black thought in my mind , and cower away from me . " she be fortunate in have such a champion , " say she . " he actually dare to threaten a lonely woman . i must really congratulate upon her protector . " the word be bitter , but the voice and manner be more acid still . " there be no use talk , " say " i only come here to tell you , -- to tell you most solemnly , -- your next outrage upon me will be your last . " with that , as i hear 's step upon the stair , i walk from the room . ay , she may look venomous and deadly , but , for all that , she be begin to see now that she have as much to fear from me as i can have from her . murder ! it have an ugly sound . but you do n't talk of murder a snake or of murder a tiger . let her have a care now . 5 . i meet and her mother at the station at eleven o'clock . she be look so bright , so happy , so beautiful . and she be so overjoy to see me . what have i do to deserve such love ? i go back home with them , and we lunch together . all the trouble seem in a moment to have be shred back from my life . she tell me that i be look pale and worried and ill . the dear child put it down to my loneliness and the perfunctory attention of a housekeeper . i pray that she may never know the truth ! may the shadow , if shadow there must be , lie ever black across my life and leave hers in the sunshine . i have just come back from them , feel a new man . with her by my side i think that i could show a bold face to any thing which life might send . 5 now , let me try to be accurate . let me try to say exactly how it occur . it be fresh in my mind , and i can set it down correctly , though it be not likely that the time will ever come when i shall forget the doings of . i have return from the ' after lunch , and be cut some microscopic section in my freezing microtome , when in an instant i lose consciousness in the sudden hateful fashion which have become only too familiar to me of late . when my sense come back to me i be sit in a small chamber , very different from the one in which i have be work . it be and bright , with settee , color hanging , and a thousand pretty little trifle upon the wall . a small ornamental clock tick in front of me , and the hand point to three . it be all quite familiar to me , and yet i stare about for a moment in a way until my eye fall upon a cabinet photograph of myself upon the top of the piano . on the other side stand one of . then , of course , i remember where i be . it be 's boudoir . but how come i there , and what do i want ? a horrible sinking come to my heart . have i be send here on some devilish errand ? have that errand already be do ? surely it must ; otherwise , why should i be allow to come back to consciousness ? oh , the agony of that moment ! what have i do ? i spring to my foot in my despair , and as i do so a small glass bottle fall from my knee on to the carpet . it be unbroken , and i pick it up . outside be write " . . " when i draw the round glass stopper , a thick fume rise slowly up , and a pungent , choke smell pervade the room . i recognize it as one which i keep for chemical testing in my chamber . but why have i bring a bottle of vitriol into 's chamber ? be it not this thick , reek liquid with which jealous woman have be know to mar the beauty of their rival ? my heart stand still as i hold the bottle to the light . thank , it be full ! no mischief have be do as yet . but have come in a minute sooner , be it not certain that the hellish parasite within me would have dash the stuff into her -- -- -- ah , it will not bear to be think of ! but it must have be for that . why else should i have bring it ? at the thought of what i might have do my worn nerve break down , and i sit shiver and twitch , the pitiable wreck of a man . it be the sound of 's voice and the rustle of her dress which restore me . i look up , and see her blue eye , so full of tenderness and pity , gaze down at me . " we must take you away to the country , , " she say . " you want rest and quiet . you look wretchedly ill . " " oh , it be nothing ! " say i , try to smile . " it be only a momentary weakness . i be all right again now . " " i be so sorry to keep you wait . poor boy , you must have be here quite half an hour ! the vicar be in the drawing-room , and , as i know that you do not care for him , i think it well that should show you up here . i think the man would never go ! " " thank he stay ! thank he stay ! " i cry hysterically . " why , what be the matter with you , ? " she ask , hold my arm as i stagger up from the chair . " why be you glad that the vicar stay ? and what be this little bottle in your hand ? " " nothing , " i cry , thrust it into my pocket . " but i must go . i have something important to do . " " how stern you look , ! i have never see your face like that . you be angry ? " " yes , i be angry . " " but not with me ? " " no , no , my darling ! you would not understand . " " but you have not tell me why you come . " " i come to ask you whether you would always love matter what i do , or what shadow might fall on my name . would you believe in me and trust me however black appearance might be against me ? " " you know that i would , . " " yes , i know that you would . what i do i shall do for you . i be drive to it . there be no other way out , my darling ! " i kiss her and rush from the room . the time for indecision be at an end . as long as the creature threaten my own prospect and my honor there might be a question as to what i should do . but now , when innocent endanger , my duty lie before me like a turnpike road . i have no weapon , but i never pause for that . what weapon should i need , when i feel every muscle quiver with the strength of a frenzied man ? i run through the street , so set upon what i have to do that i be only dimly conscious of the face of friend whom i conscious also that meet me , run with equal precipitance in the opposite direction . breathless but resolute i reach the house and ring the bell . a white cheek maid open the door , and turn white yet when she see the face that look in at her . " show me up at once to , " i demand . " , " she gasp , " die this afternoon at three ! "