the approach to the office of and be not a very dignified one , nor would the uninitiated who traverse it form any conception of the commercial prosperity of the firm in question . close to the corner of a broad and busy street , within a couple of hundred yard of , a narrow doorway open into a long whitewash passage . on one side of this be a brass plate with the inscription " and , , " and above it a curious hieroglyphic suppose to represent a human hand in the act of point . follow the guidance of this somewhat ghostly emblem , the wayfarer find himself in a small square yard surround by door , upon one of which the name of the firm reappear in large white letter , with the word " push " print beneath it . if he follow this laconic invitation he will make his way into a long , low apartment , which be the counting-house of the african trader . on the afternoon of which we speak thing be quiet at the office . the line of in the wire curtain be desert by the public , though the floor bear abundant trace of a busy morning . light shine hazily through the glaze window and cast dark shadow in the corner . on a high perch in the background a , elderly man , with mutter lip and tap finger , cast up endless line of figure . beneath him , in front of two long shine mahogany desk , half a score of young man , with bent head and stoop shoulder , appear to be ride furiously , neck and neck , in the race of life . any habitue of a office might have deduce from their relentless energy and incorruptible diligence that they be under the eye of some member of the firm . the member in question be a broad-shouldered , bull-necked young man , who lean against the marble , turn over the page of an almanac , and take from time to time a stealthy peep over the top of it at the toiler around him . command be imprint in every line of his strong , face and erect , powerful frame . above the medium size , with a vast spread of shoulder , a broad aggressive jaw , and bright bold glance , his whole pose and expression speak of resolution push to the verge of obstinacy . there be something classical in the regular feature and black , crisp , curl hair fit tightly to the well-rounded head . yet , though classical , there be an absence of spirituality . it be rather the profile of one of those emperor , splendid in its animal strength , but lack those subtle softness of eye and mouth which speak of an inner life . the heavy gold chain across the waistcoat and the bright stone which blaze upon the finger be the natural complement of the sensuous lip and curve chin . such be , only child of , and heir to the whole of his vast business . little wonder that those who have an eye to the future bent over their ledger and work with a vigour calculate to attract the attention of the junior partner , and to impress him with a due sense of their enthusiastic regard for the interest of the firm . it be speedily apparent , however , that the young gentleman 's estimate of their service be not entirely base upon their present performance . with his eye still fix upon the almanac and a sardonic smile upon his dark face , he utter a single -- " ! " a flaxen-haired clerk , perch at the further end of the high glisten desk , give a violent start , and look up with a scared face . " well , , who win ? " ask the junior partner . " , sir ! " the youth stammer . " yes , who win ? " repeat his employer . " i hardly understand you , sir , " the clerk say , grow very red and confused . " oh yes , you do , , " young remark , tap his almanac sharply with the paper-knife . " you be play odd man out with and when i come in from lunch . as i presume you be at it all the time i be away , i have a natural curiosity to know who win . " the three unhappy clerk fix their eye upon their ledger to avoid the sarcastic gaze of their employer . he go on in the same quiet -- " you gentleman draw about thirty shilling a week from the firm . i believe i be right in my figure , ? " address the senior clerk seat at the high solitary desk apart from the other . " yes , i think so . now , odd man out be , no doubt , a very harmless and fascinating game , but you can hardly expect us to encourage it so far as to pay so much an hour for the privilege of have it play in our counting-house . i shall therefore recommend my father to deduct five shilling from the sum which each of you will receive upon . that will cover the time which you have devote to your own amusement during the week . " he pause , and the three culprit be begin to cool down and congratulate themselves , when he begin again . " you will see , , that this deduction be make , " he say , " and at the same time i beg that you will deduct ten shilling from your own salary , since , as senior clerk , the responsibility of keep order in this room in the absence of your employer rest with you , and you appear to have neglect it . i trust you will look to this , . " " yes , sir , " the senior clerk answer meekly . he be an elderly man with a large family , and the lose ten shilling would make a difference to the dinner . there be nothing for it but to bow to the inevitable , and his little pinch face assume an expression of gentle resignation . how to keep his ten young subordinate in order , however , be a problem which vex him sorely . the junior partner be silent , and the remain clerk be work uneasily , not exactly know whether they might not presently be include in the indictment . their fear be terminate , however , by the sharp sound of a and the appearance of a boy with the announcement that would like a moment 's conversation with . the latter give a keen glance at his subject and withdraw into the back office , a disappearance which be hail by ten pen be throw into the air and deftly catch again , while as many derisive and triumphant young man mock at the implore effort of old in the interest of law and order . the sanctum of be approach by two door , one of oak with panel , and the other cover with green baize . the room itself be small , but lofty , and the wall be ornament by numerous section of ship stick upon long flat board , very much as the remain of fossil fish be exhibit in museum , together with map , chart , photograph , and list of sailing innumerable . above the be a large water-colour painting of the barque as she appear when on a reef to the north of . an inscription beneath this work of art announce that it have be paint by the second officer and present by him to the head of the firm . it be generally rumour that the merchant have lose heavily over this disaster , and there be some who quote it as an instance of 's habitual strength of mind that he should decorate his wall with so melancholy a souvenir . this view of the matter do not appear to commend itself to a flippant member of 's agency , who contrive to intimate , by a dexterous use of his leave eyelid and right forefinger , that the vessel may not have be so much , nor the loss to the firm so enormous as be commonly report . , as he sit at his square waiting for his son , be undeniably a man . for good or for evil no weak character lie beneath that hard angular face , with the strongly mark feature and deep-set eye . he be clean shaven , save for an iron-grey fringe of ragged whisker under each ear , which blend with the grizzled hair above . so self-contained , hard-set , and immutable be his expression that it be impossible to read anything from it except sternness and resolution , quality which be as likely to be associate with the high nature as with the most dangerous . it may have be on account of this ambiguity of expression that the world 's estimate of the old merchant be a very vary one . he be know to be a fanatic in religion , a purist in moral , and a man of the strict commercial integrity . yet there be some few who look askance at him , and none , save one , who could apply the word " friend " to him . he rise and stand with his back to the as his son enter . he be so tall that he towered above the young man , but the latter 's square and compact frame make him , apart from the difference of age , the strong man . the young man have drop the air of sarcasm which he find be most effective with the clerk , and have resume his natural manner , which be harsh and brusque . " what be up ! " he ask , drop back into a chair , and jingle the loose coin in his trouser pocket . " i have have news of the , " his father answer . " she be report from . " " ah ! " cry the junior partner eagerly . " what luck ? " " she be full , or nearly so , accord to ' report . " " i wonder be able to send a report at all , and i wonder still more that you should put any faith in it , " his son say impatiently . " the fellow be never sober . " " be a good seaman , and popular on the coast . he may indulge at time , but we all have our failing . here be the list as vouch for by our agent . ' six hundred barrel of palm -- " " be down , " the other interrupted . " it will rise before the arrive , " the merchant rejoin confidently . " then he have palm nut in bulk , gum , ebony , skin , cochineal , and ivory . " the young man give a whistle of satisfaction . " not bad for old ! " he say . " be at a fancy figure . " " we be sorely in need of a few good voyage , " remark , " for thing have be very slack of late . there be one very sad piece of intelligence here which take away the satisfaction which we might otherwise feel . three of the crew have die of fever . he do not mention the name . " " the devil ! " say . " we know very well what that mean . three woman , each with an armful of brat , besiege the office and clamour for a pension . why be seaman such improvident dog ? " his father hold up his white hand deprecatingly . " i wish , " he say , " that you would treat these subject with more reverence . what could be sad than that the of a family should be cut off ? it have grieve me more than i can tell . " " then you intend to pension the wife ? " say , with a sly smile . " by no mean , " his father return with decision . " and be not an insurance office . the labourer be worthy of his hire , but when his work in this world be over , his family must fall back upon what have be save by his industry and thrift . it would be a dangerous precedent for us to allow pension to the wife of these sailor , for it would deprive the other of all motive for lay their money by , and would indirectly encourage vice and dissipation . " laugh , and continue to rattle his silver and key . " it be not upon this matter that i desire to speak to you , " continue . " it have , however , always be my practice to prefer matter of business to private affair , however press . be say to be die , and he have send a message to me say that he wish to see me . it be inconvenient for me to leave the office , but i feel that it be my christian duty to obey such a summons . i wish you , therefore , to look after thing until i return . " " i can hardly believe that the news be true , " say , in astonishment . " there must be some mistake . why , i speak to him on ' last . " " it be very sudden , " his father answer , take his broad-brimmed hat from a peg . " there be no doubt about the fact , however . the doctor say that there be very little hope that he will survive until evening . it be a case of malignant typhoid . " " you be very old friend ? " remark , look thoughtfully at his father . " i have know him since we be boy together , " the other reply , with a slight dry cough , which be the high note of his limited emotional gamut . " your mother , , die upon the very day that 's wife give birth to this daughter of his , seventeen year ago . only survive a few day . i have hear him say that , perhaps , we should also go together . we be in the hand of a high power , however , and it seem that one shall be take and another left . " " how will the money go if the doctor be right ? " ask keenly . " every penny to the girl . she will be an heiress . there be no other relation that i know of , except the , and they have a fair fortune of their own . but i must go . " " by the way , malignant typhoid be very catch , be it not ? " " so they say , " the merchant say quietly , and stride off through the counting-house . remain behind , stretch his leg in front of the empty grate . " the governor be a hard nail , " he , as he stare down at the shine steel bar . " depend upon it , though , he feel this more than he show . why , it be the only friend he ever have in the ever will have , in all probability . however , it be no business of mine , " with which comforting reflection he begin to whistle as he turn over the page of the private day-book of the firm . it be possible that his son 's surmise be right , and that the gaunt , unemotional african merchant feel an unwonted heartache as he hail a hansom and drive out to his friend 's house at . he and have be charity schoolboy together , have rough it together , rise together , and prosper together . when be a raw-boned lad and a urchin , the latter have come to look upon the other as his champion and guide . there be some mind which be parasitic in their nature . alone they have little vitality , but they love to settle upon some strong intellect , from which they may borrow their emotion and conclusion at second-hand . a strong , vigorous brain collect around it in time many other , whose mental process be a feeble imitation of its own . thus it come to pass that , as the year roll on , learn to lean more and more upon his old , graft many of his stern peculiarity upon his own simple vacuous nature , until he become a strange parody of the original . to him be the ideal man , 's way the correct way , and 's opinion the weighty of all opinion . forty year of this fidelity must , however he might conceal it , have make an impression upon the feeling of the elder man . , by incessant attention to business and extreme parsimony , have succeed in found an export trading concern . in this he have follow the example of his friend . there be no fear of their interest ever come into collision , as his operation be confine to the . the firm grow and prosper , until begin to be look upon as a warm man in the circle . his only child be , a girl of seventeen . there be no other near relative , save , a prosperous physician . no wonder that 's active business mind , and perhaps that of his father too , should speculate as to the disposal of the fortune of the die man . push open the iron gate and stride down the gravel walk which lead to his friend 's house . a bright autumn sun shine out of a cloudless heaven bath the green lawn and the in its golden light . the air , the leave , the bird , all speak of life . it be hard to think that death be close its grip upon him who own them all . a plump little gentleman in black be just descend the step . " well , doctor , " the merchant ask , " how be your patient ? " " you have not come with the intention of see him , have you ? " the doctor ask , glance up with some curiosity at the grey face and overhang eyebrow of the merchant . " yes , i be go up to him now . " " it be a most virulent case of typhoid . he may die in an hour or he may live until nightfall , but nothing can save him . he will hardly recognize you , i fear , and you can do him no good . it be most infectious , and you be incur a needless danger . i should strongly recommend you not to go . " " why , you have only just come down from him yourself , doctor . " " ah , i be there in the way of duty . " " so be i , " say the visitor decisively , and pass up the stone step of the entrance stride into the hall . there be a large sitting-room upon the ground floor , through the open door of which the visitor see a sight which arrest him for a moment . a young girl be sit in a recess near the window , with her lithe , supple figure bent forward , and her hand clasp at the back of her head , while her elbow rest upon a small table in front of her . her superb brown hair fall in a thick wave on either side over her white round arm , and the graceful curve of her beautiful neck might have furnish a sculptor with a study for a mourning madonna . the doctor have just break his sad tidings to her , and she be still in the first paroxysm of her grief too acute , as be evident even to the unsentimental mind of the merchant , to allow of any attempt at consolation . a greyhound appear to think differently , for he have place his upon his young mistress 's lap , and be attempt to thrust his lean muzzle between her arm and to lick her face in token of canine sympathy . the merchant pause irresolutely for a moment , and then ascend the broad staircase he push open the door of 's room and enter . the blind be draw down and the chamber be very dark . a pungent whiff of disinfectant issue from it , mingle with the dank , heavy smell of disease . the bed be in a far corner . without see him , could hear the fast laboured breathing of the invalid . a trimly dress nurse who have be sit by the bedside rise , and , recognize the visitor , whisper a few word to him and leave the room . he pull the cord of the venetian blind so as to admit a few ray of daylight . the great chamber look dreary and bare , as carpet and hanging have be remove to lessen the chance of future infection . step softly across to the bedside and sit down by his die friend . the sufferer be lie on his back , apparently unconscious of all around him . his glaze eye be turn upwards towards the ceiling , and his parched lip be part , while the breath come in quick , spasmodic gasp . even the unskilled eye of the merchant could tell that the angel of death be hover very near him . with an ungainly attempt at tenderness , which have something pathetic in it , he moisten a sponge and pass it over the sick man 's feverish brow . the latter turn his restless head round , and a gleam of recognition and gratitude come into his eye . " i know that you would come , " he say . " yes . i come the moment that i get your message . " " i be glad that you be here , " the sufferer continue with a sigh of relief . from the brighten expression upon his pinch face , it seem as if , even now in the jaw of death , he lean upon his old schoolfellow and look to him for assistance . he put a waste hand above the counterpane and lay it upon 's . " i wish to speak to you , , " he say . " i be very weak . can you hear what i say ? " " yes , i hear you . " " give me a spoonful from that bottle . it clear my mind for a time . i have be make my will , . " " yes , " say the merchant , replace the medicine bottle . " the lawyer make it this morning . stoop your head and you will hear me good . i have less than fifty thousand . i should have do good have i retire year ago . " " i tell you so , " the other break in gruffly . " you do . but i act for the good . forty thousand i leave to my dear daughter . " a look of interest come over 's face . " and the balance ? " he ask . " i leave that to be equally divide among the various institution for educate the poor . we be both poor boy ourselves , , and we know the value of such school . " look perhaps a trifle disappoint . the sick man go on very slowly and -- " my daughter will have forty thousand pound . but it be so tie up that she can neither touch it herself nor enable any one else to do so until she be of age . she have no friend , , and no relation , save only my cousin , . never be a girl leave more lonely and unprotected . take her , i beg of you , and bring her up under your own eye . treat her as though she be your child . guard her above all from those who would wreck her young life in order to share her fortune . do this , old friend , and make me happy on my deathbed . " the merchant make no answer . his heavy eyebrow be draw down , and his forehead all pucker with thought . " you be the one man , " continue the sufferer , " whom i know to be just and upright . give me the water , for my mouth be dry . , which forbid , my dear girl perish before she marry , -- " his breath fail him for a moment , and he pause to recover it . " well , what then ? " " then , old friend , her fortune revert to you , for there be none who will use it so well . those be the term of the will . but you will guard her and care for her , as i would myself . she be a tender plant , , too weak to grow alone . promise me that you will do right by it ? " " i do promise it , " answer in a deep voice . he be stand up now , and lean over to catch the word of the die man . be sink rapidly . with a feeble motion he point to a volume upon the table . " take up the book , " he say . the merchant pick it up . " now , repeat after me , i swear and solemnly pledge -- " " i swear and solemnly pledge -- " to treasure and guard as if she be my -- " come the tremulous voice from the bed . " to treasure and guard as if she be my -- " in the deep bass of the merchant . " , the daughter of my deceased -- " " , the daughter of my deceased -- " " and as i treat her , so may my own flesh and blood treat me ! " " and as i treat her , so may my own flesh and blood treat me ! " the sick man 's head fall back exhaust upon his pillow . " thank ! " he mutter , " now i can die in peace . " " turn your mind away from the vanity and dross of this world , " say sternly , " and fix it upon that which be eternal , and can never die . " " be you go ? " the invalid ask sadly , for he have take up his hat and stick . " yes , i must go ; i have an appointment in the at six , which i must not miss . " " and i have an appointment which i must not miss , " the die man say with a feeble smile . " i shall send up the nurse as i go down , " say . " good-bye ! " " good-bye ! bless you , ! " the firm , strong hand of the hale man enclose for a moment the feeble , burn one of the sufferer . then plod heavily down the stair , and these friend of forty year ' standing have say their last adieu . the african merchant keep his appointment in the , but long before he reach it have go also to keep that last terrible appointment of which the messenger be death . it be a dull morning in , some week after the event with which our story open . the murky air look murky still through the glaze office window . , grim and grey , as though he be the very embodiment of the weather , stoop over his mahogany table . he have a long list in front of him , on which he be check off , as a prelude to the day 's work , the position in the market of the various speculation in which the capital of the firm be embark . his son lounge in an easy chair opposite him , look dishevelled and dark under the eye , for he have be up half the night , and the nemesis of reaction be upon him . " ! " his father ejaculate , glance round at him with disgust . " you have be drink already this morning . " " i take a brandy and seltzer on the way to the office , " he answer carelessly . " i need one to steady me . " " a young fellow of your age should not want steady . you have a strong constitution , but you must not play trick with it . you must have be very late last night . it be nearly one before i go to bed . " " i be play card with and one or two other . we keep it up rather late . " " with ? " " yes . " " i do n't care about your consort so much with that man . he drink and gamble , and do you no good . what good have he ever do himself ? take care that he do not fleece you . " the merchant feel instinctively , as he glance at the shrewd , dark face of his son , that the warning be a superfluous one . " no fear , father , " answer sulkily ; " i be old enough to choose my own friend . " " why such a friend as that ? " " i like to know man of that class . you be a successful man , father , but , you ca n't be much help to me socially . you need some one to show you the rope , and the major be my man . when i can stand alone , i will soon let him know it . " " well , go your own way , " say shortly . hard to all the world , he be soft only in this one direction . from childhood every discussion between father and son have end with the same word . " it be business time , " he resume . " let us confine ourselves to business . i see that be at @card@ yesterday . " " they be at @card@ this morning . " " what ! have you be on ' already ? " " yes , i drop in there on my way to the office . i would hold on to those . they will go up for some day yet . " the senior partner make a pencil note on the margin of the list . " we will hold on to the cotton we have , " he say . " no , sell out at once , " answer with decision , " i see young , of , last night , or rather this morning . it be hard to make head or tail of what the fool say , but he let fall enough to show that there be likely to be a drop . " make another mark upon the paper . he never question his son 's decision now , for long experience have show him that they be never form without solid ground . " take this list , , " he say , hand him the paper , " and run your eye over it . if you see anything that want change , mark it . " " i will do it in the counting-house , " his son answer . " i can keep my eye on those lazy scamp of clerk . have no idea of keep them in order . " as he go out he cannon against an elderly gentleman in a white waistcoat , who be be show in , and who ricochet off him into the office , where he shake hand heartily with the elder . it be evident from the laboured cordiality of the latter 's greeting that the new-comer be a man of some importance . he be , indeed , none other than the well-known philanthropist , , for , whose name upon a bill be hardly second to that of . " how do , , how do ? " he exclaim , mop his face with his handkerchief . he be a fussy little man , with a brusque , nervous manner . " hard at it as usual , ? always peg away . wonderful man . , ! wonderful ! " " you look warm , " the merchant answer , rub his hand . " let me offer you some claret . i have some in the cupboard . " " no , thank you , " the visitor answer , stare across at the head of the firm as though he be some botanical curiosity . " extraordinary fellow . ' ' , they call you in the . a good name , -- ! ! -- excellent name . iron-grey , you know , and hard to look at , but soft here , my dear sir , soft here . " the little man tap him with his over the cardiac region and laugh boisterously , while his grim companion smile slightly and bow to the compliment . " i have come here beg , " say , produce a roll of paper from an inner pocket . " know i have come to the right place for charity . the aboriginal , my dear boy . all it want be a few hundred to float it off . noble aim , object . " " what the object ? " the merchant ask . " well , the evolution of the aborigine , " answer in some confusion . " sort of practical darwinism . evolve ' em into high type , and turn ' em all white in time . give us a lecture about it . i will send you round a with the account . speak about their thumb . they ca n't cross them over their palm , and they have rudimentary tail , or have until they be educate off them . they wear all the hair off their back by lean against tree . marvellous thing ! all they want be a little money . " " it seem to be a praiseworthy object , " the merchant say gravely . " i know that you would think so ! " cry the little philanthropist enthusiastically . " of course , barter as you do with aboriginal race , their development and evolution be a matter of the deep importance to you . if a man come down to barter with you who have a rudimentary tail and could n't bend his , it would n't be pleasant , you know . our idea be to elevate them in the scale of humanity and to refine their taste . , of the , go to report on the matter a year or so back , and some rather painful incident occur . i believe meet with some fact , they go the length of say that he be eat . so you see we have have our martyr , my dear friend , and the least that we can do who stay at home at ease be to support a good cause to the good of our ability . " " whose name have you get ? " ask the merchant . " let be see , " say , unfold his list . " , ten ; , ten ; , five ; , ten ; , fifteen ; , five ; and a good many small amount . " " what be the high as yet ? " " , the tobacco importer , have give fifteen . " " it be a good cause , " say , dip his pen into the ink-bottle . " ' he that know what the good old book say . of course a list of the donation will be print and circulate ? " " most certainly . " " here be my cheque for pound . i be proud to have have this opportunity of contribute towards the regeneration of those poor soul whom have place in a low sphere than myself . " " , " say the member of with emotion , as he pocket the cheque , " you be a good man . i shall not forget this , my friend ; i shall never forget it . " " wealth have its duty , and charity be among them , " answer with unction , shake the philanthropist 's extended hand . " good-bye , my dear sir . let me know if our effort be attend with any success . should more money be need , you know one who may be rely on . " there be a sardonic smile upon the hard face of the senior partner as he close the door behind his visitor . " it be a legitimate investment , " he mutter to himself as he resume his seat . " what with his parliamentary interest and his financial power , it be a very legitimate investment . it look well on the list , too , and inspire confidence . i think the money be well spend . " have bow politely as the great man pass through the office , and , the wizened senior clerk , open the outer door . turn as he pass him and clap him on the shoulder . " lucky fellow , " he say in his jerky way . " good to man . watch him , mark him , imitate be the way to get on . ca n't go wrong , " and he trot down the street in search of fresh contribution towards his late fad . the shamble little clerk be still stand at the door watch the retreat figure of the millionaire , and mentally splice together his fragmentary remark into a symmetrical piece of advice which might be carry home and digest at leisure , when his attention be attract to a woman , with a child in her arm , who be hang about the entrance . she look up at the clerk in a wistful way , as if anxious to address him and yet afraid to do so . then note , perhaps , some gleam of kindness in his yellow wrinkle face , she come across to him . " think i could see , sir , " she ask , with a curtsey ; " or , maybe , you be yourself ? " the woman be wretchedly dress , and her eyelid be swollen and red as from long cry . " be in his room , " say the head clerk kindly . " i have no doubt that he will see you if you will wait for a moment . " have he be speak to the grand of the and dame who occasionally frequent the office ; he could not have speak with great courtesy . verily in these day the spirit of true chivalry have filter down from the surface and have find a lodgment in strange place . the merchant look with a surprised and suspicious eye at his visitor when she be usher in . " take a seat , my good woman , " he say . " what can i do for you ? " " please , , i be , " she answer , seat herself in a timid way upon the extreme edge of a chair . she be weary and footsore , for she have carry the baby up from that morning . " n't remember the name , " say , shake his head reflectively . " as be , sir , he be my husband , the bo'sun for many a year o ' your ship the . he go out to try and earn a bit for me and the child , sir , but he be dead o ' fever , poor dear , and lie in river , ' a cannon ball at his foot , as the carpenter himself tell me who sew him up , and i wish i be dead and with him , so i do . " she begin sob in her shawl and moan , while the child , suddenly awaken by the sound , rub its eye with its wrinkle mottle hand , and then proceed to take stock of and his office with the critical philosophy of infancy . " calm yourself , my good woman , calm yourself , " say the senior partner . he perceive that the evil prophesy by his son have come upon him , and he make a mental note of this fresh instance of 's power of foresight . " it be hard , so it be , " say , dry her eye , but still give vent to an occasional tempestuous sob . " i hear as the be ' up the river , so i spend all i have in my pocket in ' a nice little an ' egg , which be always his favourite , an ' a pint o ' bitter , an ' a quartern o ' whiskey that he could take hot after , ' naturally o ' a cold turn , and him ' from a warm country , too . then out i go , and down the river , until i see the ' up ' a tug in front of her . well i the two streak o ' white paint , let alone the ' o ' the parrot which i could hear from the bank . i could see the head o ' some of the man ' over the side , so i wave my , and one o ' them he wave back . ' for ' his little wife , ' say i , proud like to myself , and i run round to where i know as they will dock her . what with me be that excite that i could n't rightly see where i be go , and what with the crowd , for the man be ' from work , i do n't get there till the ship be alongside . then i jump aboard , and the first man i seed be , who i when we live in . ' where be ? ' i cry , run forward , eager like , to the forecastle , but he catch me by the arm as i pass him . ' , lass , steady ! ' then i look up at him , and his face be very grave , and my knee get kind o ' weak . ' where be ? ' say ' do n't ask , ' say he . ' where be he , ? ' i screech ; and then , ' do n't say the word , , do n't you say it . ' but , ' bless , sir , it do n't much matter what he say nor what he do n't , for i all , an ' down i flop on the deck in a dead faint . the mate , he take me home in a cab , and when i come to there be the supper lie , sir , and the beer , and the thing ' , and all so cosy , an ' the child ' where her father be , for i tell her he will bring her some thing from . then , to think of him ' dead in river , why , sir , it nigh break my heart . " " a sore affliction , " the merchant say , shake his grizzled head . " a sad visitation . but these thing be send to try us , . they be warning to us not to fix our thought too much upon the dross of this world , but to have high aim and more durable aspiration . we be poor short-sighted creature , the good of us , and often mistake evil for good . what seem so sad may , if take in a proper spirit , be look back upon as a starting-point from which all the good of your life have come . " " bless you , sir ! " say the widow , still furtively rub her eye with the corner of her little shawl . " you be a real kind gentleman . it do me good to hear you talk . " " we have all our burden and misfortune , " continue the senior partner . " some have more , some have less . be your turn , it may be mine . but let us struggle on to the great goal , and the weight of our burden need never cause us to sink by the wayside . and now i must wish you a very good morning , . believe me , you have my hearty sympathy . " the woman rise and then stand irresolute for a moment , as though there be something which she still wish to mention . " when will i be able to draw 's back pay , sir ? " she ask nervously . " i have pawn nigh everything in the house , and the child and me be weak from want of food . " " your husband 's back pay , " the merchant say , take down a ledger from the shelf and turn rapidly over the leave . " i think that you be under a delusion , . let me , , , , , , . ah , here it , boatswain of the . the wage which he receive amount , i see , to five pound a month . the voyage last eight month , but the ship have only be out two month and a half when your husband die . " " that be true , sir , " the widow say , with an anxious look at the long line of figure in the ledger . " of course , the contract end at his death , so the firm owe him twelve pound ten at that date . but i perceive from my book that you have be draw half-pay during the whole eight month . you have accordingly have twenty pound from the firm , and be therefore in its debt to the amount of seven pound ten shilling . we will say nothing of that at present , " the senior partner conclude with a magnificent air . " when you be a little good off you can make good the balance , but really you can hardly expect us to assist you any further at present . " " but , sir , we have nothing , " sob . " it be deplorable , most deplorable . but we be not the people to apply to . your own good sense will tell you that , now that i have explain it to you . good morning . i wish you good fortune , and hope you will let us know from time to time how you go on . we always take a keen interest in the family of those who serve us . " open the door , and the little woman stagger away across the office , still bear her heavy child . when she get into the open air she stare around her like one daze . the senior clerk look anxiously at her as he stand at the open door . then he glance back into the office . be deep in some account , and his brother clerk be all absorb in their work . he steal up to the woman , with an apologetic smile , slip something into her hand , and then hurry back into the office with an austere look upon his face , as if his whole mind be absorb in the affair of the firm . there be speculation above the ken of business man . perhaps , , that half-crown of yours may bring in good interest than the pound of your employer . the head of the firm have hardly recover his mental serenity after the painful duty of explain her financial position to the , when his quick ear catch the sound of a heavy footstep in the counting-house . a gruff voice be audible at the same time , which demand in rather more energetic language than be usually employ in that orderly establishment , whether the principal be to be see or not . the answer be evidently in the affirmative , for the lumbering tread come rapidly near , and a powerful double knock announce that the visitor be at the other side of the door . " come in , " cry , lay down his pen . this invitation be so far comply with that the handle turn , and the door revolve slowly upon its hinge . nothing more substantial than a strong smell of spirituous liquor , however , enter the apartment . " come in , " the merchant repeat impatiently . at this second mandate a great tangled mass of black hair be slowly protrude round the angle of the door . then a forehead appear , with a couple of very shaggy eyebrow and eventually a pair of eye , which protrude from their socket and look yellow and unhealthy . these take a long look , first at the senior partner and then at his surroundings , after which , as if reassure by the inspection , the remainder of the face flat nose , a large mouth with a low lip which hang down and expose a line of tooth , and finally a thick black beard which bristle straight out from the chin , and bear abundant trace of an egg have form part of its owner 's morning meal . the head have appear , the body soon follow it , though all in the same style of progression , until the individual stand reveal . he be a man , dress in a pea jacket and blue trouser and hold his tarpaulin hat in his hand . with a rough scrape and a most unpleasant leer he advance towards the merchant , a and hairy hand outstretch in sign of greeting . " why , captain , " say the head of the firm , rise and grasp the other 's hand with effusion , " i be glad to see you back safe and well . " " glad to see , to see . " his voice be thick and husky , and there be an indecision about his gait as though he have be drink heavily . " i come in sort o ' cautious , " he continue , " ' cause i do n't know who might be about . when you and me speak together we like to speak alone , you bet . " the merchant raise his bushy eyebrow a little , as though he do not relish the idea of mutual confidence suggest by his companion 's remark . " have n't you well take a seat ? " he say . the other take a chair and carry it into the extreme corner of the office . then have look steadily at the wall behind him , and rap it with his knuckle , he sit down , still throw an occasional apprehensive glance over his shoulder . " i have get a touch of the jump , " he remark apologetically to his employer . " i like to know as there ai n't no one behind me . " " you should give up this shocking habit of drinking , " say seriously . " it be a waste of the good gift with which have endow us . you be the bad for it both in this world and in the next . " do not seem to be at all impress by this very sensible piece of advice . on the contrary , he chuckle boisterously to himself , and , slap his thigh , express his opinion that his employer be a " rum ' conviction which he repeat to himself several time with various symptom of admiration . " well , well , " say , after a short pause , " boy will be boy , and sailor , i suppose , will be sailor . after eight month of anxiety and toil , end in success , be proud to be able to say the little licence must be allow . i do not judge other by the same hard and fast line by which i regulate my own conduct . " this admirable sentiment also fail to elicit any response from the obdurate , except the same manifestation of mirth and the same audible aside as to the peculiarity of his master 's character . " i must congratulate you on your cargo , and wish you the same luck for your next voyage , " the merchant continue . " , an ' gold dust , an ' skin , an ' resin , an ' cochineal , an ' gum , an ' ebony , an ' rice , an ' tobacco , an ' fruit , an ' nut in bulk . if there be a good cargo about , i will like to see it , " the sailor say defiantly . " an excellent cargo , captain ; very good indeed . three of your man die , i believe ? " " ay , three of the lubber go under . two o ' fever and one o ' . it lick me what sailor be ' to in these day . when i be afore the mast we have ' be ashamed to die o ' a trifle like that . look at me . i have be down ' coast fever sixteen time , and i have have yellow jack an ' dysentery , an ' i have be bite by the black cobra in the . i have have cholera , too . it break out in a brig when i be in the trade , and i be shipmate ' seven dead out o ' a crew o ' ten . but i ai n't none the bad for , nor never will be . but i say , , hai n't you get a drop of something about the office ? " the senior partner rise , and take a bottle from the cupboard fill out a stiff glass of rum . the sailor drink it off eagerly , and lay down the empty tumbler with a sigh of satisfaction . " say , now , " he say , with an unpleasant confidential leer , " be n't you surprise to see us come ? straight now , between man and man ? " " the old ship hang together well , and have lot of work in her yet , " the merchant answer . " lot of work ! 's truth , i think she be go in the bay ! we have a dirty night with a gale from the , an ' have be ' by dead ' for three day , so we be n't over and above sure o ' ourselves . she be n't much of a sea-going craft when we leave , but the sun have fry all the pitch out o ' her seam , and you might ' put your finger through some of them . two day an ' a night we be at the pump , for she leak like a sieve . we lose the fore topsail , blow clean out o ' the ringbolt . i never think to see again . " " if she could weather a gale like that she could make another voyage . " " she could start on another , " the sailor say gloomily , " but as like as not she will never see the end . " " come , come , you be not quite yourself this morning , . we value you as a dashing , fearless me fill your glass do n't fear a little risk where there be something to be gain . you will lose your good name if you go on like that . " " she be in a terrible bad way , " the captain insist . " you will have to do something before she can go . " " what shall we have to do ? " " dry dock her and give her a thorough overhaul . she might sink before she get out o ' the if she go as she be just now . " " very well , " the merchant say coldly . " if you insist on it , it must be do . but , of course , it would make a great difference in your salary . " " ? " " you be at present get fifteen pound a month , and five per cent . commission . these be exceptional term in consideration of any risk that you may run . we shall dry dock the , and your salary be now ten pound a month and two and a half commission . " " , there , belay ! " the sailor shout . his face be a shade dark than usual , and his bilious eye have a venomous gleam in them . " do n't you beat me down , curse you ! " he hiss , advance to the table and lean his hand upon it while he push his angry face forward until it be within a foot of that of the merchant . " do n't you try that game on , mate , for i be a british seaman , and i be under the thumb of no man . " " you be drunk , " say the senior partner . " sit down ! " " you will reduce my screw , would ? " roar , work himself into a fury . " me that have work for , and slave for , and risk my life for . you try it on , guv'nor ; just you try it on ! suppose i let out that little story o ' the painting out o ' the would the firm of be then ! i guess you will rather double my wage than have that yarn ' about . " " what do you mean ? " " what do i mean ? you do n't know what i mean , do you ? of course not . it be n't you as set us on to go at night and paint out the plimsoll mark and then paint ' em in again high up , so as to be able to overload . that be n't you , be it ? " " do you mean to assert that it be ? " " in course i do , " thunder the angry seaman . the senior partner strike the gong which stand upon the table . " , " he say quietly , " go out and bring in a policeman . " seem to be somewhat startle by this sudden move of his antagonist . " steady your helm , governor , " he say . " what be up to now ? " " i be go to give you in charge . " " what for ? " " for intimidation and use threatening language , and endeavour to extort money under false pretence . " " there be no witness , " the sailor say in a , manner . " oh yes , there be , " remark , come into the room . he have be stand between the two door which lead to the counting-house , and have overhear the latter portion of the conversation . " do n't let me interrupt you . you be say that you would blacken my father 's character unless he increase your salary . " " i do n't mean no harm , " say , glance nervously from the one to the other . he have be fairly well know to the law in his young day , and have no desire to renew the acquaintance . " who paint out those plimsoll mark ? " ask the merchant . " it be me . " " do any one suggest it to you ? " " no. " " i send in the policeman , sir ? " ask , open the door . " ask him to wait for a moment , " answer . " and now , captain , to return to the original point , shall we dry dock the and reduce the salary , or do you see your way to go back in her on the same term ? " " i will go back and be damn to it ! " say the captain recklessly , plunge his hand into the pocket of his pea jacket and plump back into his chair . " that be right , " his grim employer remark approvingly . " but swear be a most sinful practice . send the policeman away , . " the young man go out with an amused smile , and the two be leave together again . " you will not be able to pass the government inspector unless you do something to her , " the seaman say after a long pause , during which he brood over his wrong . " of course we shall do something . the firm be not mean , though it avoid unnecessary expense . we will put a coat of paint on her , and some pitch , and do up the rigging . she be a stout old craft , and with one of the smart sailor afloat in command of we always give you credit for be will run many a voyage yet . " " i be pay for the risk , guv'nor , as you say just now , " the sailor remark . " but do n't it seem kind o ' hard on them as the mate an ' the hand ? " " there be always a risk , my dear captain . there be nothing in the world without risk . you remember what be say about those who go down to the sea in ship . they see the wonder of the deep , and in return they incur some little danger . my house in might be shake down by an earthquake , or a gale might blow in the wall , but i be not always brood over the chance of it . there be no use your take it for grant that some misfortune will happen to the . " the sailor be silence , but not convince by his employer 's logic . " well , well , " he say sulkily , " i be go , so there be an end of it , and there be no good in have any more palaver about it . you have your object in run rotten ship , and you make it worth my while to take my chance in them . i be suit , and you be suit , so there be no more to be say . " " that be right . have some more rum ? " " no , not a spot . " " why not ? " " because i like to keep my head pretty clear when i be ' to you , . out o ' your office i will drink to further order , but i wo n't do business and muddle myself at the same time . when want me to start ? " " when she be unload and load up again . three week or a month yet . i expect that will have come in with the of by that time . " " unless some accident happen on the way , " say , with his old leer . " he be at when we come up the coast . i could n't put in there , for the swab have get a warrant out me for put a charge o ' shot into a nigger . " " that be a wicked wrong , indeed , " the merchant say gravely . " you must consider the interest of the firm , . we ca n't afford to have a good port block against our ship in this fashion . do they serve this writ on you ? " " another nigger bring it aboard . " " do you read it ? " " no ; i throw it overboard . " " and what become of the negro ? " " well , " say with a grin , " when i throw the writ overboard he happen to be ' on to it . so , see , he go over , too . then i up anchor and scoot . " " there be shark about there ? " " a few . " " really , , " the merchant say , " you must restrain your sinful passion . you have break the fifth commandment , and close the trade of to the . " " it never be worth a rap , " the sailor answer . " i would n't give a cuss for any of the british settlement . give me real nigger , chap as know nothing of law or civilize , or any rot of the sort . i can pull along with them . " i have often wonder how you manage it , " say curiously . " you succeed in pick up a cargo where the steady and good man ca n't get as much as a bag of nut . how do you work it ? " " there be many would like to know that , " answer , with an expressive wink . " it be a secret , then ? " " well , it ai n't a secret to you , ' cause you ai n't a skipper , and it do n't matter if you know it or not . i do n't want to have ' em all at the same game . " " how be it , then ? " " i will tell , " say . he seem to have recover his serenity by this time , and his eye twinkle as he speak of his own exploit . " i get drunk with them . that be how i do it . " " oh , indeed . " " yes , that be how it be work . love , when these certificate , merchant skipper come out they move about among the chief and talk down to them as if they be tin on wheel . the 's great coat would n't make a waistcoat for some o ' these bloke . now when i get among ' em i have ' em all into the cabin , though they be black an ' naked , an ' the smell ai n't over an ' above pleasant . then i out with the rum and it 's ' help yourself an ' pass the bottle . ' soon , see , their tongue get loosen , and as i lie low an ' keep dark i get a pretty good idea o ' what be in the market . then when i know what be to be get , it be queer if i do n't manage to get it . besides , they like a little notice , just as christian do , and they remember me because i treat them well . " " an excellent plan , capital plan ! " say the senior partner . " you be an invaluable servant . " " well , " the captain say , rise from his chair , " i be get a great deal too dry with all this palaver . i do n't mind ' drunk with nigger chief , but i be darn if -- " he pause , but the grim smile on his companion 's face show that he appreciate the compliment . " i say , " he continue , give his employer a confidential nudge with his elbow , " suppose we have go down in the bay this last time , you have ' be a bit out in your , what ? " " why so ? " " well , we be on our outward passage . an accident then might ' put thousand in your pocket , i know . come back , though , the cargo be worth more than the insurance , i reckon . you have ' be out o ' pocket if we have founder . it would ' be a case o ' the engineer hoist on his own , as say . " " we take our chance of these thing , " the merchant say with dignity . " well , good morning , guv'nor , " say brusquely . " when you want me you can lay your hand on me at the old crib , the and , . " as he pass out through the office , rejoin his father . " he be a curious chap , " he remark , jerk his head in the direction which have take . " i hear him bellow like a bull , so i think i have well listen to what he have to say . he be a useful servant , though . " " the fellow be half a savage himself , " his father say . " he be in his element among them . that be why he get on so well with them . " " he do n't seem much the bad for the climate , either . " " his body do not , but his soul , , his soul ? however , to return to business . i wish you to see the underwriter and pay the premium of the . if you see your way to it , increase the policy ; but do it carefully , , and with tact . she will start about the time of the equinoctial gale . if anything should happen to her , it would be as well that the firm should have a margin on the right side . " may call herself with grim jocoseness the " alma mater " of her student , but if she be a mother at all she be one of a very heroic and spartan cast , who conceal her maternal affection with remarkable success . the only sign of interest which she ever design to evince towards her alumnus be upon those not infrequent occasion when guinea be to be demand from them . then one be surprise to find how carefully the old hen have count her chicken , and how promptly the demand be convey to each one of the thousand throughout the empire who , in spite of neglect , cherish a sneaking kindness for their old college . there be symbolism in the very look of her , square and massive , grim and grey , with never a pillar or carve to break the dead monotony of the great stone wall . she be learn , she be practical , and she be useful . there be little sentiment or romance in her composition , however , and in this she do but conform to the instinct of the nation of which she be the young but the most flourishing teacher . a lad come up to an find himself in an enlarged and enlightened public school . if he have pass through and there be no very abrupt transition between the life which he have lead in the sixth form and that which he find await him on the bank of the and the . certain room be find for him which have be inhabit by generation of student in the past , and will be by as many in the future . his religion be care for , and he be expect to put in an appearance at hall and at chapel . he must be within bound at a fix time . if he behave indecorously he be liable to be pounce upon and report by special official , and a code of punishment be hang perpetually over his head . in return for all this his take a keen interest in him . she pat him on the back if he succeed . prise and scholarship , and fine fat fellowship be throw plentifully in his way if he will gird up his loin and aspire to them . there be nothing of this in a scotch . the young aspirant pay his pound , and find himself a student . after that he may do absolutely what he will . there be certain class go on at certain hour , which he may attend if he choose . if not , he may stay away without the slight remonstrance from the college . as to religion , he may worship the sun , or have a private fetish of his own upon the mantelpiece of his lodging for all that the care . he may live where he like , he may keep what hour he choose , and he be at liberty to break every commandment in the decalogue as long as he behave himself with some approach to decency within the precinct . in every way he be absolutely his own master . examination be periodically hold , at which he may appear or not , as he choose . the be a great unsympathetic machine , take in a stream of raw-boned cartilaginous youth at one end , and turn them out at the other as learn divine , astute lawyer , and skilful medical man . of every thousand of the raw material about six hundred emerge at the other side . the remainder be break in the process . the merit and fault of this scotch system be alike evident . leave entirely to his own device in a far from moral city , many a lad fall at the very starting-point of his life 's race , never to rise again . many become idler or take to drink , while other , after waste time and money which they could ill afford , leave the college with nothing learn save vice . on the other hand , those whose manliness and good sense keep them straight have go through a training which last them for life . they have be try , and have not be find want . they have learn self-reliance , confidence , and , in a word , have become man of the world while their confrere in be still magnify schoolboy . high up in a third flat in one , , be go through his period of probation in a little bedroom and a large sitting-room , which latter , " more , " serve the purpose of dining-room , parlour , and study . a dingy sideboard , with four still more dingy chair and an archaeological sofa , make up the whole of the furniture , with the exception of a circular mahogany , litter with and paper . above the mantelpiece be a fly-blown mirror with innumerable card and notice project in a fringe all around , and a pair of pipe rack flank it on either side . along the centre of the , arrange with suspicious neatness , as though seldom disturb , stand a line of solemn book , 's osteology , 's anatomy , ' physiology , and 's , together with a disarticulate human skull . on one side of the fireplace two thigh bone be stack ; on the other a pair of foil , two basket-hilted , and a set of boxing-glove . on a shelf in a convenient niche be a small stock of general literature , which appear to have be considerably more thumb than the work upon medicine . 's and 's rub cover with 's of and a tatter line of novel . over the sideboard be a frame photograph of the fifteen , and opposite it a small one of himself , clad in the scanty of garb , as he appear after win the half-mile at the . a large silver goblet , the trophy of that occasion , stand underneath upon a bracket . such be the student 's chamber upon the morning in question , save that in a roomy in the corner the young gentleman himself be languidly recline , with a short wooden pipe in his mouth , and his foot perch up upon the side of the table . , , broad in the chest and narrow in the loins , with the strength of a bullock and the graceful activity of a stag , it would be hard to find a fine specimen of young british manhood . the long , fine curve of the limb , and the easy pose of the round , strong head upon the thick , muscular neck , might have serve as a model to an athenian sculptor . there be nothing in the face , however , to recall the regular beauty of the . it be anglo-saxon to the last feature , with its honest breadth between the eye and its nascent moustache , a shade light in colour than the skin . shy , and yet strong ; plain , and yet pleasing ; it be the face of a type of man who have little to say for himself in this world , and say that little badly , but who have do more than all the talker and the writer to ring this planet round with a crimson girdle of british possession . " wonder whether be ready ! " he murmur , throw down the scotsman , and stare up at the roof . " it be nearly eleven o'clock . " he rise with a yawn , pick up the poker , stand upon the chair , and bang three time upon the ceiling . three muffle tap respond from the room above . step down and begin slowly to discard his coat and his waistcoat . as he do so there be a quick , active step upon the stair , and a lean , , middle-sized young fellow step into the room . with a nod of greet he push the table over to one side , throw off his two upper garment , and pull on a pair of the boxing-glove from the corner . have already do the same , and be stand , a model of manly grace and strength , in the centre of the room . " practice your lead , . about here . " he tap the centre of his forehead with his swollen gauntlet . his companion poise himself for a moment , and then , lash out with his left hand , come home with a heavy thud on the place indicate . smile gently and shake his head . " it wo n't do , " he say . " i hit my hard , " the other answer apologetically . " it wo n't do . try again . " the visitor repeat the blow with all the force that he could command . shake his head again despondently . " you do n't seem to catch it , " he say . " it be like this . " he lean forward , there be the sound of a sharp clip , and the novice shot across the room with a force that nearly send his skull through the panel of the door . " that be it , " say mildly . " oh , it be , be it ? " the other respond , rub his head . " it be deucedly interesting , but i think i would understand it good if i see you do it to some one else . it be something between the explosion of a powder magazine and a natural convulsion . " his instructor smile grimly . " that be the only way to learn , " he say . " now we shall have three minute of give-and-take , and so end the morning lesson . " while this little scene be be enact in the lodging of the student , a very stout little elderly man be walk slowly down , glance up at the number upon the door . he be square and deep and broad , like a bottle of , with a large ruddy face and a pair of bright black eye , which be shrewd and critical , and yet have a merry twinkle of eternal boyishness in their depth . bushy side whisker , shoot with grey , flank his rubicund visage , and he throw out his foot as he walk with the air of a man who be on good term with himself and with every one around him . at he stop and rap loudly upon the door with the head of his metal-headed stick . " ? " he ask , as a , angular woman respond to his summons . " that be me , sir . " " live with you , i believe ? " " third floor front , sir . " " be he in ? " suspicion shine in the woman 's eye . " be it a bill ? " she ask . " a bill , my good woman ! no , no , nothing of the kind . be my name . i be the lad 's come up from to see him . i hope he have not be overwork himself ? " a ghost of a smile play about the woman 's face . " i think not , sir , " she answer . " i almost wish i have come round in the afternoon , " say the visitor , stand with his thick leg astride upon the door-mat . " it seem a pity to break his chain of thought . the morning be his time for study . " " ! ' fash that . " " well ! well ! the third floor , you say . he do not expect me so early , i shall surprise the dear boy at his work . " the landlady stand listen expectantly in the passage . the sturdy little man plod heavily up the first flight of stair . he pause on the landing . " dear me ! " he murmur . " some one be beat carpet . how can they expect poor to read ? " at the second landing the noise be much loud . " it must be a dancing school , " conjecture the doctor . when he reach his son 's door , however , there could no longer be any doubt as to whence the sound proceed . there be the stamp and shuffle of foot , the hiss of breath , and an occasional soft thud , as if some one be butt his head against a bale of wool . " it be epilepsy , " gasp the doctor , and turn the handle he rush into the room . one hurried glance show him the struggle which be go on . there be no time to note detail . some maniac be assault his . he spring at the man , seize him round the waist , drag him to the ground , and seat himself upon him . " now tie his hand , " he say complacently , as he balance himself upon the writhe figure . it take some little time before his son , who be with laughter , could explain to the energetic doctor that the gentleman upon whom he be perch be not a dangerous lunatic , but , on the contrary , a very harmless and innocent member of society . when at last it be make clear to him , the doctor release his prisoner and be profuse in his apology . " this be my father , , " say . " i hardly expect him so early . " " i must offer you a thousand apology , sir . the fact be that i be rather short-sighted , and have no time to put my glass on . it seem to me to be a most dangerous scuffle . " " do n't mention it , sir , " say , with great good humour . " and you , , you rogue , be this the way you spend your morning ? i expect to find you deep in your book . i tell your landlady that i hardly like to come up for fear of disturb you at your work . you go up for your first professional in a few week , i understand ? " " that will be all right , dad , " say his son demurely . " and i usually take a little exercise of this sort as a preliminary to the labour of the day . try this armchair and have a cigarette . " the doctor 's eye fall upon the medical work and the disarticulate skull , and his depart . " you have your tool close at hand , i see , " he remark . " yes , dad , all ready . " " those bone bring back old memory to me . i be rusty in my anatomy , but i dare say i could stump you yet . let me see now . what be the different foramen of the sphenoid bone , and what structure pass through them ? ? " " come ! " yell his son . " come ! " and dash out of the room . " i do n't hear any one call , " observe the doctor . " do n't you , sir ? " say , pull on his coat . " i think i hear a noise . " " you read with my son , i believe ? " " yes , sir . " " then perhaps you can tell me what the structure be which pass through the foramen of the sphenoid ? " " oh yes , sir . there be right , , all right ! excuse me , sir ! he be call me ; " and vanish as precipitately as his friend have do . the doctor sit alone , puff at his cigarette , and brood over his own dullness of hearing . presently the two student return , look just a little , and plunge instantly into wild talk about the weather , the town , and the and everything except the sphenoid bone . " you have come in good time to see something of life , " say young . " we elect our new . and i will take you down and show you the sight . " " i have often wish to see something of it , " his father answer . " i be apprentice to my profession , , in the old-fashioned way , and have few opportunity of attend college . " " indeed , sir . " " but i can imagine it all . what can be more charming than the sight of a community of young man all strive after knowledge , and emulate each other in the ardour of their study ? not that i would grudge them recreation . i can fancy them stroll in band round the classic precinct of their venerable , and amuse themselves by discuss the rival theory of physiologist or the late addition to the pharmacopoeia . " have listen with become gravity to the commencement of this speech , but at the last sentence he choke and vanish for the second time out of the room . " your friend seem amused , " remark mildly . " yes . he get take like that sometimes , " say his son . " his brother be just the same . i have hardly have a chance yet to say how glad i be to see you , dad . " " and i to see you , my dear boy . your mother and come up by the night train . i have private room at the hotel . " " ! i can only remember her as a little quiet girl with long brown hair . that be six year ago . she promise to be pretty . " " then she have fulfill her promise . but you shall judge that for yourself . she be the ward of , the african merchant , but we be the only relation she have upon earth . her father be my second cousin . she spend a good deal of her time now with us at much as her guardian will allow . he prefer to have her under his own roof , and i do n't blame him , for she be like a ray of sunshine in the house . it be like draw his tooth to get him to consent to this little holiday , but i stick at it until i weary him weary him out . " the little doctor chuckle at the thought of his victory , and stretch out his thick leg towards the fire . " this examination will prevent me from be with you as much as i wish . " " that be right , my boy ; let nothing interfere with your work . " " still , i think i be pretty safe . i be glad they have come now , for next be the international football match . and i be the two scotch half-back . you must all come down and see it . " " i will tell you what , , " say , reappear in the doorway , " if we do n't hurry up we shall see nothing of the election . it be close on twelve . " " i be all ready , " cry , jump to his foot and button his coat . " let us be off , then , " say his son ; and pick up hat and stick they clatter off down the lodging-house stair . a rectorial election be a peculiarly scotch institution , and , however it may strike the impartial observer , it be regard by the student themselves as a rite of extreme solemnity and importance from which grave issue may depend . to hear the speech and address of rival orator one would suppose that the integrity of the constitution and the very existence of the empire hang upon the return of their special nominee . two candidate be choose from the most eminent of either party and a day be fix for the polling . every undergraduate have a vote , but the professor have no voice in the matter . as the duty be nominal and the position honourable , there be never any lack of distinguished aspirant for a vacancy . occasionally some well-known literary or scientific man be invite to become a candidate , but as a rule the election be fight upon strictly political line , with all the old-fashioned accompaniment of a parliamentary contest . for month before the great day there be bustle and stir . secret committee meet , rule be formulate , and insidious agent prowl about with an eye to the political training of those who have not yet nail their colour to any particular mast . then come a grand meeting of the liberal student ' association , which be trump by a dinner of the ' . the campaign be then in full swing . great board appear at the gate , on which pithy satire against one or other candidate , parody on song , quotation from their speech , and gaudily paint cartoon be post . those who be suppose to be able to feel the pulse of the move about with the weight of much knowledge upon their brow , throw out hint as to the probable majority one way or the other . some profess to know it to a nicety . other shake their head and remark vaguely that there be not much to choose either way . so week after week go by , until the excitement reach a climax when the date of the election come round . there be no need upon that day for or any other stranger in the town to ask his way to the , for the whoop and yell which proceed from that usually decorous building might have be hear from 's to . in front of the gate be a dense crowd of townspeople peer through into the quadrangle , and derive much entertainment from the movement of the lively young gentleman within . large number of the more peaceable undergraduate stand about under the arch , and these quickly make a way for the newcomer , for both and as note athlete command a respect among their which medallist and honour man might look for in vain . the broad open quadrangle , and all the numerous balcony and terrace which surround it , be crowd with an excited mob of student . the whole three thousand odd elector who stand upon the college roll appear to be present , and the noise which they be make would have reflect credit on treble their number . the dense crowd surge and seethe without pause or rest . now and again some orator would be hoist up on the shoulder of his fellow , when an oscillation of the crowd would remove his supporter and down he would come , only to be succeed by another at some other part of the assembly . the name of either candidate would produce roar of applause and equally vigorous howl of execration . those who be lucky enough to be in the balcony above hurl down missile on the crowd , egg , potato , and bag of flour or of sulphur ; while those below , wherever they find room to swing an arm , return the fusillade with interest . the doctor 's view of serenity and the high converse of pallid student vanish into thin air as he gaze upon the mad tumultuous scene . yet , in spite of his fifty year , he laugh as heartily as any boy at the wild prank of the young politician , and the ruin which be wrought upon coat and shoot jacket by the hail of unsavoury projectile . the crowd be most dense and most noisy in front of the in which the counting of the vote be go forward . at one the result be to be announce , and as the long hand of the great clock creep towards the hour , a hush of expectation fall upon the assembly . the brazen clang break harshly out , and at the same moment the folding door be fling open , and a knot of man rush out into the crowd , who swirl and eddy round them . the centre of the throng be violently agitate , and the whole mass of people sway outward and inwards . for a minute or two the excited combatant seethe and struggle without a clue as to the cause of the commotion . then the corner of a large placard be elevate above the head of the rioter , on which be visible the word " liberal " in great letter , but before it could be raise further it be tear down , and the struggle become fierce than ever . up come the placard other corner this the word " " upon it , and then immediately vanish as before . enough have be see , however , to show which way the victory have go , and shout of triumph arise everywhere , with wave of hat and clatter of stick . meanwhile , in the centre the two party fight round the placard , and the commotion begin to cover a wide area , as either side be reinforce by fresh supporter . one gigantic seize the board , and hold it aloft for a moment , so that it could be see in its entirety by the whole multitude : , @card@ . but his triumph be short-lived . a stick descend upon his head , his heel be trip up , and he and his placard roll upon the ground together . the victor succeed , however , in force their way to the extreme end of the quadrangle , where , as every man know , the full-length statue of look down upon the classic ground which he love so well . an audacious swarm up upon the pedestal and balance the obnoxious notice on the marble arm of the professor . thus convert into a political partisan , the revere inventor of the kaleidoscope become the centre of a furious struggle , the vanquish politician make the most desperate effort to destroy the symbol of their opponent ' victory , while the other offer an equally vigorous resistance to their attack . the struggle be still proceed when remove his father , for it be impossible to say what form the riot might assume . " what goth ! what barbarian ! " cry the little doctor , as they walk down the . " and this be my dream of refined quiet and studious repose ! " " they be not always like that , sir , " say his son apologetically . " they be certainly a little jolly . " " a little jolly ! " cry the doctor . " you rogue , . i believe if i have not be there you would have be their ringleader . " he glance from one to the other , and it be so evident from the expression of their face that he have just hit the mark , that he burst into a great guffaw of laughter , in which , after a moment 's hesitation , his two young companion heartily join . the rectorial election have come and have go , but another great event have take its place . it be the day of the and match . good weather could not have be desire . the morning have be hazy , but as the sun shine out the fog have gradually rise , until now there remain but a suspicion of it , float like a plume , above the frown wall of , and twine a fairy wreath round the unfinished column of the national monument upon the . the broad stretch of the 's , which occupy the valley between the old town and the new , look green and , and their fountain sparkle merrily in the sunshine . their wide expanse , and , form a strange contrast to the rugged pile of grim old house which bound them upon the other side and the massive grandeur of the great hill beyond , which lie like a crouch lion keep watch and ward , day and night , over the ancient capital of the scottish king . traveller who have search the whole world round have find no fair view . so think three of the genus who be ensconce that forenoon in the bow window of the and gaze across the bright green valley at the dull historical background beyond . one we already know , a stoutish gentleman , ruddy-faced and black-eyed , with check trouser , light waistcoat and heavy chain , leg widely part , his hand in his pocket , and on his face that expression of irreverent and critical approval with which the travelled briton usually regard the work of nature . by his side be a young lady in a tight-fitting travel dress , with trim leather belt and snow-white collar and cuff . there be no criticism in her sweet face , now flush with -- nothing but unqualified wonder and admiration at the beautiful scene before her . an elderly woman sit in a basket chair in the recess , and look up with quiet loving eye at the swift play of emotion which sweep over the girl 's eager feature . " oh , , " she cry , " it be really too heavenly . i can realize that we be free . i ca n't help fear that it be all a dream , and that i shall wake up to find myself pour out 's coffee , or listen to as he read the morning quotation . " the elder woman stroke the girl 's hand caressingly with her soft , motherly palm . " do n't think about it , " she murmur . " no , do n't think about it , " echo the doctor . " my wife be quite right . do n't think about it . but , dear me , what a job i have to persuade your guardian to let you go . i should have give it up in really i have not know that you have set your heart upon it . " " oh , how good you both be to me ! " cry the girl , in a pretty little gush of gratitude . " , , ! but as to , he be perfectly right . if i have you i should keep you fast to myself , i promise you . , ? " " that we would , . " " perfect tyrant , both of us . , ? " " yes , . " " i be afraid that i be not very useful in a household , " say the girl . " i be too young to look after thing for poor papa . , of course , have a housekeeper of his own . i read the financial news to him after dinner every day , and i know all about stock and and those american railway which be perpetually rise and fall . one of them go wrong last week , and swear , and say that the chasten those whom he love . he do not seem to like be chasten a bit though . but how delightful this be ! it be like live in another world . " the girl be a pretty figure as she stand in the window , tall , lithe , and graceful , with the long soft curve of budding womanhood . her face be sweet rather than beautiful , but an artist would have revel in the delicate strength of the softly rounded chin , and the quick bright play of her expression . her hair , of a deep rich brown , with a bronze shimmer where a sunbeam lie athwart it , sweep back in those thick luxuriant coil which be the unfailing index of a strong womanly nature . her deep blue eye dance with life and light , while her slightly nose and her sensitive smile mouth all speak of gentle good humour . from her sunny face to the dainty little shoe which peep from under the trim black skirt , she be an eminently pleasant object to look upon . so think the passer-by as they glance up at the great bow window , and so , too , think a young gentleman who have drive up to the hotel door , and who now bound up the step and into the room . he be envelop in a long shaggy ulster , which stretch down to his ankle , and he wear a velvet cap trim with silver stick carelessly on the back of his powerful yellow curl head . " here be the boy ! " cry his mother gaily . " how be you , mam dear ? " he cry , stoop over her to kiss her . " how be you , dad ? good morning , . you must come down and wish us luck . what a blessing that it be pretty warm . it be miserable for the spectator when there be an east wind . what do you think of it , dad ? " " i think you be an unnatural young renegade to play against your mother country , " say the sturdy doctor . " oh , come , dad ! i be bear in , and i belong to a scotch club . surely that be good enough . " " i hope you lose , then . " " we be very likely to . , of the of , have strain his leg , and we shall have to play , of the , at full so good a man by a long way . the odd be five to four on the this morning . they be say to be the very strong lot that ever play in an match . i have bring a cab with me , so the moment you be ready we can start . " there be other besides the student who be excite about the come struggle . all be in a ferment . football be , and always have be , the national game of among those who affect violent exercise , while golf take its place with the more sedately incline . there be no game so fit to appeal to a hardy and active people as that composite exercise prescribe by the , in which fifteen man pit strength , speed , endurance , and every manly attribute they possess in a prolonged struggle against fifteen antagonist . there be no room for mere knack or trickery . it be a fierce personal contest in which the ball be the central rallying point . that ball may be kick , push , or carry ; it may be force onwards in any conceivable manner towards the enemy 's goal . the fleet of foot may seize it and by superior speed thread their way through the rank of their opponent . the heavy of frame may crush down all opposition by dead weight . the hardy and most enduring must win . even match between prominent local club excite much interest in and attract crowd of spectator . how much more then when the pick of the manhood of be to try their strength against the very cream of the player from the of the . the road which converge on the , on which the match be to be play , be dark with thousand all wend their way in one direction . so thick be the move mass that the carriage of the party have to go at a walk for the latter half of the journey , in spite of the objurgation of the driver , who , as a patriot , feel the responsibility which rest upon him in have one of the team in his charge , and the necessity there be for deliver him up by the appoint time . many in the crowd recognize the young fellow and wave their hand to him or call out a few word of encouragement . and even the doctor begin to reflect some of the interest and excitement which show itself on every face around them . the youth alone seem to be unaffected by the general enthusiasm , and spend the time in endeavour to explain the principle of the game to his fair companion , whose ignorance of it be comprehensive and astound . " you understand , " he say , " that there be fifteen player on each side . but it would not do for the whole of these fifteen man to play in a crowd , for , in that case , if the other side force the ball past them , they would have nothing to fall back reserve , as it be . therefore , as we play the game in , ten man be tell off to play in a knot . they be pick for their weight , strength , and endurance . they be call the forward , and be suppose to be always on the ball , follow it everywhere , never stop or tire . they be oppose , of course , by the forward of the other side . now , immediately behind the forward be the two . they should be very active fellow , good dodger and fast runner . they never join in the very rough work , but they always follow on the outskirt of the forward , and if the ball be force past it be their duty to pick it up and make away with it like lightning . if they be very fast they may succeed in carry it a long way before they be , ' as we call it . it be their duty also to keep their eye on the of the enemy , and to tackle them if they get away . behind them again be the two ' three-quarter , ' as they call them in . i be one of them . they be suppose to be fast runner too , and a good deal of the tackle come to their lot , for a good runner of the other side can often get past the quarter , and then the half have get to bring him down . behind the half-back be a single back . he be the last resource when all other be past . he should be a sure and long kicker , so as to get the ball away from the goal by that you be not listen . " " oh yes , i be , " say . as a matter of fact the great throng and the novel sight be distract her so much that she find it hard to attend to her companion 's disquisition . " you will understand it quickly enough when you see it , " the student remark cheerily . " here we be at the ground . " as he speak the carriage rattle through a broad gateway into a large open grassy space , with a great pavilion at one side of it and a stake enclosure about two hundred yard long and a hundred broad , with a at each end . this space be mark out by gaily colour flag , and on every side of it , press against the barrier the whole way round , be an enormous crowd , twenty and thirty deep , with other occupy every piece of rise ground or coign of vantage behind them . the most moderate computation would place the number of spectator at fifteen thousand . at one side there be a line of cab in the background , and thither the carriage of the drive , while rush off with his bag to the pavilion to change . it be high time to do so , for just as the carriage take up its position a hoarse roar burst from the great multitude , and be take up again and again . it be a welcome to the english team , which have just appear upon the ground . there they be , clad in white knickerbockers and jersey , with a single red rise embroider upon their breast ; as a set of young fellow as the whole world could produce . tall , square-shouldered , , as active as kitten and as powerful as young bullock , it be clear that they would take a lot of beating . they be the pick of the and club , with a few player from the northern county ; not a man among them whose name be not know wherever football be play . that tall , long-legged youth be , the great half-back , who be say to be able to send a drop-kick further than any of his predecessor in the annals of the game . there be , the famous quarter , only ten stone in weight , but as lithe and slippery as an eel ; and , the other quarter , be just such to tackle himself , but as tenacious as a bulldog in hold an adversary . that one with the straw-coloured hair be , the great forward ; and there be nine lad of metal who will stand by him through thick and thin . they be a lot , and betting , which have be five on four to them in the morning , show symptom of come to five to three . in the meantime , by no mean abash at find themselves the cynosure of so many eye , the englishman proceed to keep up their circulation by leap-frog and horse-play , for their jersey be thin and the wind bleak . but where be their adversary ? a few impatient moment slowly pass , and then from one corner of the ground there rise a second cheer , which ripple down the long line of onlooker and swell into a mighty shout as the scotchman vault over the barrier into the arena . it be a nice question for connoisseur in physical beauty as to which team have the good of it in physique . the in their blue jersey , with a thistle upon their breast , be a sturdy , hard-bitten lot , average a couple of pound more in weight than their opponent . the latter be , perhaps , more regularly and symmetrically build , and be pronounce by expert to be the fast team , but there be a massive , gaunt look about the scotch forward which promise well for their endurance . indeed , it be on their forward that they principally rely . the presence of three such player as , , and make the english exceptionally strong behind , but they have no man in front who be individually so strong and fast as , , or . and , the scotch half-back , and , the quarter , whose blaze red head be a very oriflamme wherever the struggle wax hot , be the good man that the could boast of behind . the have win the choice of goal , and elect to play with what slight wind there be at their back . a small thing may turn the scale between two evenly balanced team . , the captain , place the ball in front of him upon the ground , with his man line all along on either side , as eager as hound in leash . some fifty yard in front of him , about the place where the ball would drop , the scot gather in a sullen crowd . there be a sharp ring from a bell , a murmur of excitement from the crowd . take two quick step forward , and the yellow ball fly swift and straight , as if it have be shoot from a cannon , right into the expectant group in front of him . for a moment there be grasping and turmoil among the scotchman . then from the crowd emerge , the great forward , the ball tuck well under his arm , his head down , run like the wind , with his nine forward in a dense clump behind him , ready to bear down all opposition , while the other five follow more slowly , cover a wide stretch of ground . he meet the englishman who have start full cry after the ball the moment that their captain have kick it . the first hurl himself upon him . , without slacken his pace , swerve slightly , and he miss him . the second he pass in the same way , but the third catch quickly at his leg , and the fly head over heel and be promptly collar . not much use collar him now ! in the very act of fall he have throw the ball behind him . , of , catch it and bear it on a dozen yard , when he be seize and knock down , but not before he have bequeath his trust to another , who struggle manfully for some pace before he too be bring to the ground . this pretty piece of " passing " have recover for the scotch all the advantage lose by the english kick-off , and be greet by roar of applause from the crowd . and now there be a " maul " or " scrimmage . " be there ever another race which do such thing and call it play ! twenty young man , so blend and inextricably mixed that no one could assign the various arm and leg to their respective owner , be strain every muscle and fibre of their body against each other , and yet be so well balance that the dense clump of humanity stand absolutely motionless . in the centre be an inextricable chaos where shoulder heave and head rise and fall . at the edge be a fringe of in an extreme state of -- ever paw for a firm foothold , and apparently completely independent of the rest of their owner , whose head and body have bore their way into the melee . the pressure in there be tremendous , yet neither side give an inch . just on the skirt of the throng , with bent body and hand on knee , stand the cool little , watch the gasp giant , and also keep a keen eye upon each other . let the ball emerge near one of these , and he will whip it up and be ten pace off before those in the " maul " even know that it be go . behind them again be the half , alert and watchful , while the back , with his hand in his pocket , have an easy consciousness that he will have plenty of warn before the ball can pass the four good man who stand between the " maul " and himself . now the dense throng sway a little backwards and forwards . an inch be lose and an inch be gain . the crowd roar with delight . " maul , ! " " maul ! " " ! " " ! " the shouting would stir the blood of the mild mortal that ever breathe . stand in the carriage , rosy with excitement and enjoyment . her heart be all with the wearer of the rose , in spite of the presence of her old in the opposite rank . the doctor be as much delight as the young man on the ground , and the cabman wave his arm and shout in a highly indecorous fashion . the two pound ' difference in weight be begin to tell . the english sway back a yard or two . a blue coat emerge among the white one . he have fight his way through , but have leave the ball behind him , so he dash round and put his weight behind it once more . there be a last upheaval , the maul be split in two , and through the rent come the redoubtable scotch forward with the ball amongst them . their solid phalanx have scatter the english like spray to right and leave . there be no one in front of them , no one but a single little man , almost a boy in size and weight . surely he can hope to stop the tremendous rush . the ball be a few yard in advance of the lead scot when he spring forward at it . he seize it an instant before his adversary , and with the same motion writhe himself free from the man 's grasp . now be the time for the crack to show what he be make of . the crowd yell with excitement . to right and leave run the great scotch forward , grasp , slip , pursue , and right in the midst of them , as quick and as erratic as a trout in a pool , run the little man , dodge one , avoid another , slip between the finger of two other . surely he be catch now . no , he have pass all the forward and emerge from the ruck of man , pelt along at a tremendous pace . he have dodge one of the scotch quarter , and outstrip the other . " well play , ! " shout the crowd . " well run , ! " " now , ! " " now , ! " " well collar , ; well collar , indeed ! " the little have come to an end of his career , for have be as quick as he and have catch him round the waist as he attempt to pass , and bring him to the ground . the cheer be hearty , for the two half-back be the only man in the team , and there be hundred of student among the spectator . the good doctor colour up with pleasure to hear his boy 's name bellow forth approvingly by a thousand excited lung . the play be , as all good judge say it would be , very equal . for the first forty minute every advantage gain by either side have be promptly neutralize by a desperate effort on the part of the other . the mass of struggle player have sway backwards and forwards , but never more than twenty or thirty yard from the centre of the ground . neither goal have be seriously threaten as yet . the spectator fail to see how the odd lay on be justify , but the " fancy " abide by their choice . in the second forty it be think that the superior speed and stay power of the will tell over the heavy scot . there seem little the matter with the latter as yet , as they stand in a group , wipe their grimy face and discuss the state of the game ; for at the end of forty minute the goal be change and there be a slight interval . and now the last hour be to prove whether there be good man breed in the hungry as any who live on more fruitful ground and beneath warm sky . if the play be desperate before , it become even more so now . each member of either team play as if upon him alone depend the issue of the match . again and again , , , and their redoubtable phalanx of dishevelled scot break away with the ball ; but as often the english quarter and half-back , by their superior speed , more than make up for the weakness of their forward , and carry the struggle back into the enemy 's ground . two or three time , the , who be credit with the power of reach the goal from almost any part of the ground , get hold of the ball , but each time before he could kick he be charge by some one of his adversary . at last , however , his chance come . the ball trickle out of a maul into the hand of , who at once turn and throw it to the half-back behind him . there be no time to reach him . he take a quick glance at the distant goal , a short run forward , and his long limb swing through the air with tremendous force . there be a dead silence of suspense among the crowd as the ball describe a lofty parabola . down it come , down , down , as straight and true as an arrow , just graze the and pitch on the grass beyond , and the groan of a few afflict patriot be drown in the hearty cheer which hail the english goal . but the victory be not win yet . there be ten minute leave for the scotchman to recover this blow or for the englishman to improve upon it . the play so furiously that the ball be keep down near the english goal , which be only save by the splendid defensive play of their back . five minute pass , and the scot in turn be be press back . a series of brilliant run by , , and take the fight into the enemy 's country , and keep it there . it seem as if the visitor mean score again , when a sudden change occur in the state of affair . it be but three minute off the calling of time when , one of the scotch , get hold of the ball , and make a magnificent run , pass right through the oppose forward and quarter . he be collar by , but immediately throw the ball behind him . have follow up the and catch the ball when it be throw backwards . now or never ! the lad feel that he would sacrifice anything to pass the three man who stand between him and the english goal . he pass like the wind before the half-back could disentangle himself from . there be but two now to oppose him . the first be the other english half-back , a broad-shouldered , powerful fellow , who rush at him ; but , without attempt to avoid him , lower his head and drive at him full tilt with such violence that both man reel back from the collision . recover himself first , however , and get past before the other have time to seize him . the goal be now not more than twenty yard off , with only one between and it , though half a dozen more be in close pursuit . the back catch him round the waist , while another from behind seize the collar of his jersey , and the three come heavily to the ground together . but the deed be do . in the very act of fall he have manage to kick the ball , which flicker feebly up into the air and just clear the english bar . it have scarcely touch the ground upon the other side when the ringing of the great bell announce the termination of the match , though its sound be entirely drown by the tumultuous shouting of the crowd . a thousand hat be throw into the air , ten thousand voice join in the roar , and meanwhile the cause of all this outcry be still sit on the ground , smile , it be true , but very pale , and with one of his arm dangle uselessly from his shoulder . well , the breaking of a be a small price to pay for the saving of such a match as that . so think as he make for the pavilion , with his father keep off the exultant crowd upon one side and upon the other . the doctor butt a path through the dense mob with a vigour which show that his son 's talent in that direction be hereditary . within half an hour be safely ensconce in the corner of the carriage , with his shoulder brace back , , and his arm support by a sling . how quietly and deftly the two woman slip a shawl here and a rug there to save him from the jarring of the carriage ! it be part of the angel nature of woman that when youth and strength be maim and helpless they appeal to her more than they can ever do in the pride and flush of their power . here lie the compensation of the unfortunate . 's dark blue eye fill with ineffable compassion as she bend over him ; and he , catch sight of that expression , feel a sudden new unaccountable spring of joy bubble up in his heart , which make all previous hope and pleasure seem vapid and meaningless . the little god shoot hard and straight when his mark be still in the golden dawn of life . all the way back he lie with his head among the cushion , dream of minister angel , his whole soul steep in quiet contentment as it dwell upon the sweet earnest eye which have look so tenderly into his . it have be an eventful day with the student . he have save his side , he have break his , and now , most serious of all , he have realize that he be hopelessly in love . within a few week of his recovery from his accident be to go up for his first professional examination , and his father , who have now retire from practice with a fair fortune , remain in until that event should come off . there have be some difficulty in persuade to give his consent to this prolongation of his ward 's leave , but the old merchant be very much engross with his own affair about that time , which make him more amenable than he might otherwise have be . the two traveller continued , therefore , to reside in their hotel , but the student hold on to his lodging in , where he use to read during the morning and afternoon . every evening , however , he manage to dine at the , and would stay there until his father pack him off to his book once more . it be in vain for him to protest and to plead for another half-hour . the physician be inexorable . when the fated hour come round the unhappy youth slowly gather together his hat , his glove , and his stick , spread out that operation over the great possible extent of time which it could by any mean be make to occupy . he would then ruefully bid his kinsfolk adieu , and retire rebelliously to his book . very soon , however , he make a discovery . from a certain seat in the it be possible to see the interior of the sitting-room in which the visitor remain after dinner . from the time when this fact dawn upon him , his room in the evening know him no more . the garden be lock at night , but that be a mere trifle . he use to scramble over the railing like a cat , and then , plant himself upon the particular seat , he would keep a watch upon the hotel window until the occupant of the room retire to rest . it might happen that his cousin remain invisible . then he would return to his room in a highly dissatisfied state , and sit up half the night protest against fate and smoke strong black tobacco . on the other hand , if he have the good luck to see the graceful figure of his old playfellow , he feel that that be the next good thing to be actually in her company , and depart eventually in a more contented frame of mind . thus , when fondly imagine his son to be a mile away grapple with the mystery of science , that lad be in reality perch within sixty yard of him , with his thought engross by very different matter . could not fail to understand what be go on . however young and innocent a girl may be , there be always some subtle feminine instinct which warn her that she be love . then first she realize that she have pass the shadowy frontier line which divide the from that of the woman . feel uneasy and perplex , and half involuntarily she change her manner towards him . it have be frank and sisterly ; now it become more distant and constrain . he be quick to observe the change , and in private rave and rage at it . he even make the mistake of show his pique to her , upon which she become still more retiring and conventional . then be bemoan himself in the sleepless watch of the night , and confide to his that in his belief such a case have never occur before in the history of the world , and never by any chance could or would happen again . he also break out into an eruption of bad verse , which be find by his landlady during her daily examination of his private paper , and be read aloud to a select audience of neighbour , who be all much impress , and cackle sympathetically among themselves . by degree develop other symptom of the distemper which have come upon him so suddenly . he have always be remarkable for a certain of appearance and carelessness of dress which harmonize with his bohemian habit . all this he suddenly abjure . one fine morning he pay successive visit to his tailor , his , his hatter , and his hosier , which leave all those worthy tradesman rub their hand with satisfaction . about a week afterwards he emerge from his room in a state of gorgeousness which impress his landlady and amaze his friend . his old college companion hardly recognize 's honest phiz as it look out above the most fashionable of coat and under the glossy of hat . his father be anything but edify by the change . " i do n't know what be come over the lad , , " he remark after one of his visit . " if i think he be go to turn to a fop , by the i will disown him ! do n't you notice a change in him yourself ? " manage to evade the question , but her bright blush might have open the old man 's eye have he observe it . he hardly realize yet that his son really be a man , and still less do he think of 's little girl as a woman . it be generally some comparative stranger who first make that discovery and bring it home to friend and relative . have an awkward way of intrude itself at inconvenient time , but it never come more inopportunely than when it smite one who be read for his first professional examination . during these week , when be stump about in boot which be two size too small for him , in the hope of make his muscular , foot a trifle more elegant , and be split glove in a way which surprise his glover , all his energy ought by right to have be concentrate upon the mystery of botany , chemistry , and zoology . during the precious hour that should have be devote to the master of the of the or the natural order of endogenous plant , he be expend his energy in endeavour to recall the word of the song which his cousin have sing the evening before , or to recollect the exact intonation with which she remark to him that it have be a fine day , or some other equally momentous observation . it follow that , as the day of the examination come round , the student , in his lucid interval , begin to feel anxious for the result . he have know his work fairly well , however , at one time , and with luck he might pull through . he make an energetic attempt to compress a month 's reading into a week , and when the day for the written examination come round he have recover some of his lost ground . the paper suit him fairly well , and he feel as he leave the hall that he have have good fortune than he deserve . the viva voce ordeal be the one , however , which he know would be most dangerous to him , and he dread it accordingly . it be a raw spring morning when his turn come to go up . his father and drive round with him to the gate . " keep up your pluck , , " the old gentleman say . " be cool , and have all your wit about you . do n't lose your head , whatever you do . " " i seem to have forget the little i ever know , " say dolefully , as he trudge up the step . as he look back he see wave her hand to him cheerily , and it give him fresh heart . " we shall hope to see you at lunch time , " his father shout after him . " mind you bring us good news . " as he speak the carriage rattle away down the , and join the knot of expectant student who be wait at the door of the great hall . a melancholy group they be , , and dolorous , partly from the effect of a long course of study and partly from their present trepidation . it be painful to observe their attempt to appear confident and unconcerned as they glance round the heaven , as if to observe the state of the weather , or examine with archaeological fervour the inscription upon the old wall . most painful of all be it , when some one , pluck up courage , would venture upon a tiny joke , at which the whole company would gibber in an ostentatious way , as though to show that even in this dire pass the appreciation of humour still remain with them . at time , when any of their number allude to the examination or detail the question which have be propound to or the day before , the mask of unconcern would be drop , and the whole assembly would glare eagerly and silently at the speaker . generally on such occasion matter be make infinitely bad by some 's comforter , who creep about suggest abstruse question , and hint that they represent some examiner 's particular hobby . such a one come to 's elbow , and quench the last ray of hope which linger in the young man 's bosom . " what do you know about cacodyl ? " be his impressive question . " cacodyl ? " cry aghast . " it be some sort of antediluvian reptile , be n't it ? " the questioner break into a sickly smile . " no , " he say . " it be an organic explosive chemical compound . you be sure to be ask about cacodyl . be dead on it . he ask every one how it be prepare . " , much perturb at these tidings , be feverishly endeavour to extract some little information from his companion concern the compound , when a bell ring abruptly inside the room and a janitor with a red face and a blue slip of paper appear at the door . " , , , " this functionary shout in a very pompous voice , and three unhappy young man file through the door into the solemn hall beyond . the scene inside be not calculate to put them at their ease . three table , half a dozen yard from each other , be litter with various specimen and scientific instrument , and behind each sit two elderly gentleman , and critical . at one side be stuff specimen of various small beast , numerous skeleton and skull , large jar contain fish and reptile preserve in spirit of wine , jawbone with great tooth which grin savagely at the unfortunate candidate , and numerous other zoological relic . the second table be heap over with a blaze of gorgeous orchid and tropical plant , which look strangely out of place in the great bleak room . a row of microscope bristle along the edge . the third be the most appalling of all , for it be bare with the exception of several sheet of paper and a pencil . chemistry be the most dangerous of the many traps set to ensnare the unwary student . " ; ; , " the janitor shout once more , and the candidate move in front of the respective table . find himself face a great spider crab , which appear to be regard him with a most malignant expression upon its crustacean feature . behind the crab sit a little professor , whose project eye and crooked arm give him such a resemblance to the creature in front that the student could not help smile . " , " say a tall , clean-shaven man at the other end of the table , " be serious . this be no time for levity . " 's expression after that would have make the fortune of a mute . " what be this ? " ask the little professor , hand a small round object to the candidate . " it be an sea-urchin , " say triumphantly . " have they any circulation ? " ask the other examiner . " a water vascular system . " " describe it . " start off fluently , but it be no part of the policy of the examiner to allow him to waste the fifteen minute allot them in expatiate upon what he know well . they interrupt him after a few sentence . " how do this creature walk ? " ask the one . " by mean of long tube which it project at pleasure . " " how do the tube enable the creature to walk ? " " they have sucker on them . " " what be the sucker like ? " " they be round hollow disc . " " be you sure they be round ? " ask the other sharply . " yes , " say stoutly , though his idea on the subject be rather vague . " " and how do this sucker act ? " ask the tall examiner . begin to feel that these two man be exhibit a very unseemly curiosity . there seem to be no satiate their desire for information . " it create a vacuum , " he cry desperately . " how do it create a vacuum ? " " by the contraction of a muscular pimple in the centre , " say , in a moment of inspiration . " and what make this pimple contract ? " lose his head , and be about to say " electricity , " when he happily check himself and substitute " muscular action . " " very good , " say the examiner , and the student breathe again . the tall one return to the charge , however , with , " and this it compose of striped fibre or ? " " , " shriek at a venture , and both examiner rub their hand and murmur , " very good , indeed ! " at which 's hair begin to lie a little flatter , and he cease to feel as if he be in a turkish bath . " how many tooth have a rabbit ? " the tall man ask suddenly . " i do n't know , " the student answer with candour . the two look triumphantly at one another . " he do n't know ! " cry the goggle-eyed one decisively . " i should recommend you to count them the next time you have one for dinner , " the other remark . as this be evidently mean for a joke , have the tact to laugh , and a very gruesome and awe-inspiring laugh it be too . then the candidate be badger about the pterodactyl , and concern the difference in anatomy between a bat and a bird , and about the lamprey , and the cartilaginous fish , and the amphioxus . all these question he answer more or less to the satisfaction of the less . when at last the little bell tinkle which be the sign for candidate to move on to other table , the tall man lean over a list in front of him and mark down upon it the follow hieroglyphic : -- - " -- - . " this 's sharp eye at once detect , and he depart well pleased , for he know that the " " mean , and as to the minus sign after it , it matter little to him whether he have do rather more than well or rather less . he have pass in zoology , and that be all which concern him at present . but there be pitfall ahead . as he move to the botany table a examiner wave his hand in the direction of the row of microscope as an intimation that the student be to look through them and pronounce upon what he see . seem to compress his whole soul into his one eye as he glare hopelessly through the tube at what appear to him to resemble nothing so much as a sheet of ice with the mark of skate upon it . " come along , come along ! " the examiner growl impatiently . courtesy be conspicuous by its absence in most of the examination . " you must pass on to the next one , unless you can offer an opinion . " this venerable teacher of botany , though naturally a kind-hearted man , be well know as one of the most malignant specie of examiner , one of the school which consider such an ordeal in the light of a trial of strength between their pupil and themselves . in his eye the candidate be endeavour to pass , and his duty be to endeavour to prevent him , a result which , in a large proportion of case , he successfully accomplish . " hurry on , hurry on ! " he reiterate fussily . " it be a section of a leaf , " say the student . " it be nothing of the sort , " the examiner shout exultantly . " you have make a bad mistake , sir ; a very bad one , indeed . it be the of a water plant . move on to the next . " , in much perturbation of mind , shuffle down the line and look through the next brazen tube . " this be a preparation of stoma , " he say , recognize it from a print in his book on botany . the professor shake his head despondingly . " you be right , " he say ; " pass on to the next . " the third preparation be as puzzling to the student as the first have be , and he be steel himself to meet the inevitable when an unexpected circumstance turn the scale in his favour . it chance that the other examiner , be somewhat less of a fossil than his confrere , and have still vitality enough to take an interest in thing which be foreign to his subject , have recognize the student as be the young hero who have damage himself in uphold the honour of his country . be an ardent patriot himself his heart warm towards , and perceive the imminent peril in which he stand he interfere in his behalf , and by a few lead question get him on safe ground , and manage to keep him there until the little bell tinkle once more . the young examiner show remarkable tact in feel his way , and keep within the very limited area of the student 's knowledge . he succeed so well , however , that although his colleague shake his hoary head and intimate in other way his poor opinion of the candidate 's acquirement , he be force to put down another " " upon the paper in front of him . the student draw a long breath when he see it , and march across to the other table with a mixture of trepidation and confidence , like a jockey ride at the last and high hurdle in a . alas ! it be the last hurdle which often floor the rider , and too be doom to find the final ordeal an insurmountable one . as he cross the room some evil chance make him think of the gossip outside and of his allusion to the abstruse substance know as cacodyl . once let a candidate 's mind hit upon such an idea as this , and nothing will ever get it out of his thought . feel his head buzz round , and he pass his hand over his forehead and through his curly yellow hair to steady himself . he feel a frenzied impulse as he sit down to inform the examiner that he know very well what they be go to ask him , and that it be hopeless for him to attempt to answer it . the lead professor be a ruddy-faced , benevolent old gentleman , with spectacle and a kindly manner . he make a few commonplace remark to his colleague with the good-natured intention of give the student before him time to compose himself . then , turn blandly towards him , he say in the mild of -- " you ever row in a pond ? " acknowledge that he have . " perhaps , on those occasion , " the examiner continue , " you may have chance to touch the mud at the bottom with your oar . " agree that it be possible . " in that case you may have observe that a large bubble , or a succession of them have rise from the bottom to the surface . now , of what gas be that bubble compose ? " the unhappy student , with the one idea always ferment on his brain , feel that the worst have come upon him . without a moment 's hesitation or think he express his conviction that the compound be cacodyl . never do two man look more surprised , and never do two generally grave savant laugh more heartily than do the two examiner when they realize what the candidate have answer . their mirth speedily bring him back to his sense . he see with a feeling of despair that it be marsh gas which they have of the simple and common of chemical combination . alas ! it be too late now . he know full well that nothing could save him . with poor mark in botany and zoology , such an error in chemistry be irreparable . he do what be perhaps the good thing under the circumstance . rise from his chair he make a respectful bow to the examiner , and walk straight out of the the great astonishment of the janitor , who have never before witness such a breach of decorum . as the student close the door behind him he look back and see that the other professor have leave their respective table and be listen to an account of the incident from one of the a roar of laughter the moment afterwards show that they appreciate the humour of it . his gather round outside in the hope of share in the joke , but he push them angrily aside and stride through the midst of them and down the step . he know that the story would spread fast enough without his assistance . his mind be busy too in shape a certain resolution which he have often think over during the last few month . the two old people and wait long and anxiously in their sitting-room at the hotel for some news of the absentee . the doctor have , at first , attempt a lofty cynicism and general assumption of indifference , which rapidly break down as the time go by , until at last he be wander round the room , drum upon the furniture with his finger and show every other sign of acute impatience . the window be on the first floor , and have be station there as a sentinel to watch the pass crowd and signal the first sign of tidings . " ca n't you see him yet ? " the doctor ask for the twentieth time . " no , dear , i do n't , " she answer , glance up and down the street . " he must be out now . he should have come straight to us . come away from the window , my dear . we must not let the young monkey see how anxious we be about him . " sit down by the old man and stroke his broad brown hand with her tender white one . " do n't be uneasy , dear , " she say ; " it be sure to be all right . " " yes , he be sure to pass , " the doctor answer ; " my soul , who be this ? " the individual who cause this exclamation be a very and rosy-cheeked little girl , coarsely clad , with a pile of book and a slate under her arm , who have suddenly enter the apartment . " please sir , " say this apparition , with a bob , " i be . " " be you , indeed ? " say the doctor , with mild irony . " and what want here , ? " " please , sir , my , , ask me if i ' gie this letter frae the gentleman what be ' ' her . " with these word the little mite deliver her missive and , have give another bob , depart upon her way . " why , " the doctor cry in astonishment , " it be direct to me and in 's writing . what can be the meaning of this ? " " oh dear ! oh dear ! " cry , with the quick perception of womanhood ; " it mean that he have fail . " " impossible ! " say the doctor , fumble with nervous finger at the envelope . " by , though , " he continue , as he glance over the content , " you be right . he have . poor lad ! he be more cut up about it than we can be , so we must not blame him . " the good physician read the letter over several time before he finally put it away in his , and he do so with a thoughtful face which show that it be of importance . as it have an influence upon the future course of our story we can end the chapter well than by exercise our literary privilege , and peep over the doctor 's shoulder before he have fold it up . this be the epistle in : -- - " my , " you will be sorry to hear that i have fail in my exam . i be very cut up about it , because i fear that it will cause you grief and disappointment , and you deserve neither the one nor the other at my hand . " " it be not an unmixed misfortune to me , because it help me to make a request which i have long have in my mind . i wish you to allow me to give up the study of medicine and to go in for commerce . you have never make a secret of our money affair to me , and i know that if i take my degree there would never be any necessity for me to practise . i should therefore have spend five year of my life in acquire knowledge which would not be of any immediate use to me . i have no personal inclination towards medicine , while i have a very strong objection to simply live in the world upon money which other man have earn . i must therefore turn to some fresh pursuit for my future career , and surely it would be good that i should do so at once . what that fresh pursuit be to be i leave to your judgment . personally , i think that if i embark my capital in some commercial undertaking i might by stick to my work do well . i feel too much cast down at my own failure to see you , but i hope to hear what you think from your own lip . " " tom . " " perhaps this failure will do no harm after all , " the doctor mutter thoughtfully , as he fold up the letter and gaze out at the cold glare of the northern sunset . the residence of , late of the , be not know to any of his friend . it be true that at time he allude in a modest way to his " little place , " and even go to the length of remark airily to new acquaintance that he hope they would look him up any time they happen to be in his direction . as he carefully refrain , however , from ever give the slight indication of which direction that might be , his invitation never lead to any practical result . still they have the effect of fill the recipient with a vague sense of proffer hospitality , and occasionally lead to more substantial kindness in return . the gallant major 's figure be a familiar one in the of the and , at the of the . tall and pompous , with a portly frame and a puffy clean-shaven face which peer over an abnormally high collar and old-fashioned linen cravat , he stand as a very type and emblem of staid middle-aged respectability . the major 's hat be always of the glossy , the major 's coat be without a wrinkle , and , in short , from the summit of the major 's bald head to his bulbous and his gouty toe , there be not a flaw which the most severe critic of the illustrious have detect . let us add that the conversation of the major be as irreproachable as his he be a distinguished soldier and an accomplished traveller , with a retentive memory and a mind stuff with the good thing of a lifetime . combine all these quality , and one would naturally regard the major as a most desirable acquaintance . it be painful to have to remark , however , that , self-evident as this proposition might appear , it be vehemently contradict by some of the initiate . there be rumour concern the major which seriously compromise his private character . indeed , such a pitch have they reach that when that gallant officer put himself forward as a candidate for a certain select club , he have , although propose by a lord and second by a baronet , be most ignominiously pill . in public the major affect to laugh over this social failure , and to regard it as somewhat in the nature of a practical joke , but privately he be deeply incense . one day he momentarily drop his veil of unconcern while play billiard with the honourable , who be generally credit with have have some hand in the major 's exclusion . " be ! sir , " the veteran suddenly exclaim , inflate his chest and turn his apoplectic face upon his companion , " in the old day i would have call the lot of you out , sir , every one , begin with the committee and work down ; i would , be ! " at which savage attack the honourable 's face grow as white as the major 's be red , and he begin to wish that he have be more reserve in his confidence to some of his acquaintance respect the exclusiveness of the club in question , or at least refrain from hold up the major be pill as a proof thereof . the cause of this vague feeling of distrust which have go abroad concern the old soldier be no very easy matter to define . it be true that he be know to have a book on every race , and to have secret mean of information from and jockey which occasionally stand him in good stead ; but this be no uncommon thing among the man with whom he consort . again , it be true that be much addict to whist , with guinea point , and to billiard match for substantial sum , but these stimulating recreation be also habitual to many man who have lead eventful life and require a strong seasoning to make ordinary existence endurable . perhaps one reason may have be that the major 's billiard play in public vary to an extraordinary degree , so that on different occasion he have appear to be aim at the process term by the initiate " get on the money . " the warm friendship , too , which the old soldier have contract with sundry vacuous and sappy youth , who be kindly pilot by him into life and show how and when to spend their money , have be most comment upon . perhaps the vagueness about the major 's private residence and the mystery which hang over him outside his club may also have excited prejudice against him . still , however his detractor might malign him , they could not attempt to deny the fact that be the third son of the honourable , who again be the second son of the of , one of the most ancient of hibernian family . this pedigree the old soldier take care to explain to every one about him , more particularly to the sappy youth aforementioned . it chance that on the afternoon of which we speak the major be engross by this very subject . stand at the head of the broad stone step which lead up to the palatial edifice which its occupier irreverently term the and , he be explain to a bull-necked , young man the series of marriage and which have culminate in the production of his own portly , stiff-backed figure . his companion , who be none other than , of the great african firm of that name , lean against one of the pillar of the portico and listen gloomily to the major 's family reminiscence , give an occasional yawn which he make no attempt to conceal . " it be as plain as the finger of me hand , " the old soldier say in a wheezy muffle brogue , as if he be speak from under a feather-bed . " see here now , be of , a cousin of old . " the major tap his thumb with the silver head of his to represent the maiden . " she marry , of the o ' the ; that be he elevate his stubby forefinger ; " and here be their three child , , , and . " up go three other finger . " grow up , and then run away with her . this other thumb o ' mine will stand for that young , and then me -- " " oh , hang your finger , " exclaim with emphasis . " it be very interesting , major , but it would be more intelligible if you write it out . " " and so i shall , me boy ! " the major cry enthusiastically , by no mean abash at the sudden interruption . " i will draw it up on a bit o ' foolscap paper . let be see ; , ? address to the office , of course . though , for that matter , ' , , ' would you . i be ' of to , of the , the other day , and he know you at once . ' ? ' say he . ' the same , ' say ' merchant prince ? ' say he . ' the same , ' say ' i will be proud to meet him , ' say he . ' and you shall , ' say he be the good blood of county . " " more blood than money , i suppose , " the young man say , smooth out his crisp black moustache . " , you have about hit it there . he go to , and come back with five and thousand pound . i meet him in the day he arrive . ' this be no good to me , , ' say he . ' why not ? ' i ask . ' not enough , ' say he ; ' just enough to unsettle me . ' ' what then ? ' say ' put it on the favourite for the , ' say he . and he do too , every pinny of it , and the horse be beat on the post by a short head . he drop the lot in one day . a fact , sir , ' me honour ! come to me next day . ' leave ! ' say he . ' nothing ? ' say ' only one thing , ' say he . ' suicide ? ' say ' marriage , ' say he . within a month he be marry to the second , who have five thou . in her own right , and five more when turn up his toe . " " indeed ? " say his companion languidly . " fact , ' me honour ! by the , here come . how , , how do ? , i remember when he be a boy at , and i use to lam him with a bootjack for his cheek . ah , yes ; i be go to seem a awkward ! ! -- , but annoy , you know . the fact be , me boy , come away in a hurry from me little place , i leave me purse on the drawers in the bedroom , and here be up in the billiard-room challenge me to play for a i wo n't without have the money in me pocket . may be poor , me dear friend , here he puff out his chest and tap on it with his round , be honest , and pay debt of honour on the nail . no , sir , there be no one can say a word against , except that he be a half-pay old fool with more heart than brain . however , " he add , suddenly drop the sentimental and come back to the practical , " if you , me dear boy , can me with the money until morning , i will play with pleasure . there be not many man that i will ask such a favour of , and even from you i will never accept anything more than a mere . " " you may stake your life on that , " say with a sneer , look sullenly down and trace figure with the end of his stick on the stone step . " you will never get the chance . i make it a rule never to lend any one money , either for short or long period . " " and you wo n't let me have this accommodation ? " " no , " the young man say decisively . for a moment the major be , weather-beaten face assume an even dark tint , and his small dark eye look out angrily from under his shaggy brow at his youthful companion . he manage to suppress the threaten explosion , however , and burst into a loud roar of laughter . " ' me ! " he wheeze , poke the young man in the rib with his stick , an implement which he have grasp a moment before as though he meditate put it to a less pacific use , " you young of be too much for poor old . , sir , to think of be stick in the mud for the want of a paltry tenner ! will laugh when he hear of it . you know of the ? he give me good advice : ' always sew a note into the lining of each waistcoat you have get . then you ca n't go short . ' tried it once , and , be ! if me do n't stale that very waistcoat and sell it for six and sixpence . you be not go , be you ? " " yes ; i be due in the . the governor leave at four . good-bye . shall i see you ? " " , as per usual , " quoth the clean-shaven warrior . he look after the retreat figure of his late companion with anything but a pleasant expression upon his face . the young man happen to glance round as he be half-way down the street , on which the major smile after him paternally , and give a merry flourish with his stick . as the old soldier stand on the top of the club step , pompous , , and respectable , pose himself as though he have be place there for the inspection of passer-by as a sample of the aristocracy within , he make several attempt to air his grievance to pass member touch the question of the expectant and the missing purse . beyond , however , elicit many sally of wit from the young spirit , for it be part of the major 's policy to lay himself open to be a butt , his laudable perseverance be entirely throw away . at last he give it up in disgust , and raise his stick hail a passing ' bus , into which he spring , take a search glance round to see that no one be follow him . after a drive which bring him to the other side of the , he get out in a broad , busy thoroughfare , line with large shop . a narrow turning from the main artery lead into a long , dingy street , consist of very high house , which run parallel to the other , and present as great a contrast to it as the back of a painting do to the front . down this sombre avenue the major strut with all his wonted pomposity , until about half-way down he reach a tall , house , with many notice of " apartment " glare from the window . the line of railing which separate this house from the street be rusty , and break and the whole place have a flavour of mildew . the major walk briskly up the stone step , hollow out by the foot of generation of lodger , and push open the great door , which bear upon it a brass plate indicate that the establishment be keep by a , he walk into the hall with the air of one who tread familiar ground . up one flight of stair , up two flight of stair , and up three flight of stair do he climb , until on the fourth landing he push open a door and find himself in a small room , which form for the nonce the " little place " about which he be wont at the club to make depreciatory allusion , so skilfully introduce that the listener be leave in doubt as to whether the major be the happy possessor of a country house and ground , or whether he merely own a large suburban villa . even this modest sanctum be not entirely the major be own , as be show by the presence of a ruddy-faced man with a long , tawny beard , who sit on one side of the empty , puff at a great pipe , and comport himself with an ease which show that he be no casual visitor . as the other enter , the man in the chair give vent to a guttural grunt without remove the mouthpiece of his pipe from between his lip ; and return the greeting with an off-handed nod . his next proceeding be to take off his glossy hat and pack it away in a . he then remove his coat , his collar , his tie , and his gaiter , with equal solicitude , and put them in a place of safety . after which he don a long purple dressing-gown and a , in which garb he perform the first step of a mazurka as a sign of the additional ease which he experience . " not much to dance about either , me boy , " the old soldier say , seat himself in a camp-chair and put his foot upon another one . " , we be all on the verge . unless luck take a turn there be no say what may become of us . " " we have be than this before now many a time , " say the man , in an accent which proclaim him to be a german . " my money come , or you , or something arrive to set all thing right . " " 's hope so , " the major say fervently . " it be a mercy to get out of these stiff and starch clothes ; but i have to be careful of them , for me cess to him ! -- give no credit , and there be little of the knock about . without good clothes on me back i will be like a sweeper without a broom . " the german nod his intense appreciation of the fact , and puff a great blue cloud to the ceiling . be a political refugee from the fatherland , who have manage to become foreign clerk in a small firm , an occupation which just enable him to keep body and soul together . he and the major have lodge in different room in another establishment until some common leaven of have bring them together . when circumstance have drive them out of their former abode , it have occur to the major that by share his room with he would diminish his own expense , and at the same time secure an agreeable companion , for the veteran be a sociable soul in his unofficial hour and have all the hibernian dislike to solitude . the arrangement commend itself to the german , for he have a profound admiration for the other 's versatile talent and varied experience ; so he grunt an acquiescence and the thing be do . when the major 's luck be good there be brave time in the little fourth floor back . on the other hand , if any slice of good fortune come in the 's way , the major have a fair share of the prosperity . during the hard time which intervene between these gleam of opulence , the pair rough it as good they might . the major would sometimes create a fictitious splendour by dilate upon the beauty of , in county , which be the headquarters of all the . " we will go and live there some day , me boy , " he would say , slap his comrade on the back . " it will be mine from the dungeon forty foot below the ground , right up , , to the flagstaff from which the of loyalty flaunt the breeze . " at these speech the simple-minded german use to rub his great red hand together with satisfaction , and feel as please as though he have actually be present with the fee simple of the castle in question . " have you have your letter ? " the major ask with interest , roll a cigarette between his finger . the german be expect his quarterly remittance from his friend at home , and they be both anxiously await it . shake his head . " bad luck to them ! they should have send a wake ago . you should do what do . you do n't know , of the ? when he and i be in he be vex at the allowance which he have from , his uncle , not turn up at the right time . ' , , ' he say to me , ' i will warm the old rascal up . ' so he sit down and write a letter to his uncle , in which he tell him his way would be the ruin of them , and more to the same effect . when get the letter he be in such a 's own rage , that while he be dictate a codicil to his will he tumble off the chair in a fit , and come in for a clean thousand a year . " " be more dan he deserve , " the german remark . " but do you stand for money ? " take ten sovereign out of his trouser pocket and place them upon the table . " you know me law , " he say ; " i never , on any consideration , break into these . you ca n't sit down to play card for high stake with less in your purse , and if i be to change one , be ! they will all go like a whiff o ' smoke . the know when i will get a start again then . bar this money i have hardly a pinny . " " nor me , " say despondently , slap his pocket . " mind , me boy ! what be in the common purse , i wonder ? " he look up at a little leather bag which hang from a brass nail on the wall . in flush time they be wont to deposit small sum in this , on which they might fall back in their hour of need . " not much , i fear , " the other say , shake his head . " well , now , we want something to pull us together on a dull day like this . suppose we send out for a bottle of sparkling , ? " " not enough money , " the other object . " well , well , let be have something cheap . beaune , now ; beaune be a good comforting sort of drink . what say to split a bottle of beaune , and pay for it from the common purse ? " " not enough money , " the other persist doggedly . " well , claret be it , " sigh the major . " maybe it be good in this sort of weather . let us send out for a bottle of claret ? " the german take down the little leather bag and turn it upside down . a and a penny roll out . " be all , " he say . " not enough for claret . " " but there be for beer , " cry the major radiantly . " , it be just the time for a quart of . i , when he be our chief in , use to say that a man who get beyond enjoy beer and a clay pipe at a pinch be either an ass or a coxcomb . he smoke a clay at the mess table himself . , who command the division , tell him it be . ' be , ' he say . , they nearly the man for it . he get the at the quarry , and be kill at the . " a slatternly , slipshod girl answer the bell , and have receive her order and the unite available fund of the two comrade , speedily return with a brace of froth pint pot . the major ruminate silently over his cigarette for some time , on some unpleasant subject , apparently , for his face be stem and his brow knit . at last he break out with an oath . " be ! , i ca n't stand that young fellow . i will have to chuck him up . he be such a cold-blooded , , calculate sort of a chap , -- " the remainder of the major 's sentence be lose in the beer flagon . " what for do you make him your friend , then ? " " well , " the old soldier confess , " it seem to me that if he want to fool his money away at card or any other , might as well have the handling of it as any one else . , he be as cunning as a basketful of monkey . he play a safe game for low stake , and never throw away a chance . if i do n't think i have be a loser in pocket by know him , while as to me character , i be very sure i be the worse there . " " vat 's de matter mit him ? " " what be not the matter with him . if he be he be not natural , and if he be natural he be not . i do n't to be a saint . i have see some fun in me day , and hope to see some more before i die ; but there be some thing that i would n't do . if i live be card it be all fair and aboveboard . i never play anything but game o ' skill , and i reckon on me skill bring me out on the right side , take one night with another through the year . again , at billiard i may not always play me good , but that be . you do n't want a whole room to know to a point what your game be . i be the last man to preach , but , , i do n't like that chap , and i do n't like that handsome , brazen face of his . i have the great part of my life reading folk ' face , and never very far out either . " make no remark , and the two continue to smoke silently , with an occasional pull at their flagon . " besides , it be no good to me socially , " the major continued . " the fellow ca n't keep quiet , else he might pass in a crowd ; but that commercial instinct will show itself . if he go to heaven he will start an agency for harp and crown . do i tell you what the honourable say to me at the club ? , he let me have it straight ! ' , ' he say , ' i do n't mind you . you be one o ' the right sort when all be say and do , but if you ever such a chap as that to me again , i will cut you as well as him for the future . ' i have them to put the young spalpeen in a good humour , for , be short , as know , i think it might be necessary to negotiate a loan from him . " " vat do you say his name vas ? " ask suddenly . " . " " be his father a ? " " what the be a ? " the major ask impatiently . " be it a merchant you mean ? " " ah , a merchant . one who trade with the afrikaner ? " " the same . " take a bulky pocket-book from his inside pocket , and scan a long list of name therein . " ah , it be the same , " he cry at last triumphantly , shut up the book and replace it . " & , african be , , . " " those be they . " " and you say dey be rich ? " " yes . " " very rich ? " " yes . " the major begin to think that his companion have be imbibe in his absence , for there be an unfathomable smile upon his face , and his red beard and hair seem to bristle from some internal excitement . " very rich ! , ! very rich ! " he laugh . " i know ; not as friend , ! but i know and their affair . " " what be you drive at ? let be have it . out with it , man . " " i tell you , " say the german , suddenly become supernaturally solemn and saw his hand up and down in the air to emphasize his remark , " in tree or four month , or a year at the most , there be no firm of . they be rotten , ! he blow an imaginary feather up into the air to demonstrate the extreme fragility of the house in question . " you be rave , , " say excitedly . " why , man , their name be above suspicion . they be look upon as the sound concern in the . " " may be ; may be , " the german answer stolidly . " vat i know , i know , and vat i say i say . " " and how know it ? tell me that you know lore about it than the man on ' change and the firm that do business with them ? " " i know vat i know , and i say vat i say , " the other repeated . " be a rogue . be in the hundred of water in this canaster tobacco , and one must be for ever . " " and you wo n't tell me where you hear this of the ? " " it be no good to you . it be enough vat i say be certain . let it suffice that be people vat be bind to tell other people all dey know about anything whatever . " " you do n't make it over clear now , " the old soldier grumble . " you mane that these secret society and socialist let each other know all that come in their way and have their own mean of get information . " " may be , and may not be , " the german answer , in the same oracular voice . " i think , in any case , my good friend , i give you vat you call in the straight tap . it be always to have the straight tap . " " thank , me boy , " the major say heartily . " if the firm be in a bad way , either the youngster do n't know of it , or else he be the most natural actor that ever live . be ! there be the ; let be get down before the bread and be all finish . " be in the habit of furnish her lodger with an evening meal at a small sum per head . there be only a certain amount of bread and butter supply for this , however , and those who come late be likely to find an empty platter . the two feel that the subject be too grave a one to trifle with , so they suspend their judgment upon the while they clatter down to the dining-room . although not a whisper have be hear of it in ordinary commercial circle , there be some foundation for the forecast which have make as to the fate of the great house of . for some time back matter have be go badly with the african trader . if the shrewd eye of be unable to detect any indication of this state of affair in the manner or conversation of the junior partner , the reason simply be that that gentleman be entirely ignorant of the imminent danger which hang over his head . as far as he know , the concern be as prosperous and as flourishing as it have be at the time of the death of . the momentous secret be lock in the breast of his grim old father , who bear it about with him as the spartan lad do the a quiver or groan to indicate the care which be gnaw at his heart . place face to face with ruin , fight against it desperately , and , withal , coolly and warily , throw away no chance and leave no stone unturned . above all , he exert exert himself prevent any rumour of the critical position of the firm from leak out in the city . he know well that should that once occur nothing could save him . as the wounded buffalo be gore to death by the herd , so the crippled man of business may give up all hope when once his position be know by his fellow . at present , although and a few other such might have an inkling from source of their own as to how matter stand , the name of be still regard by business man as the very synonym for commercial integrity and stability . if anything , there seem to be more business in and more luxury at the residence at than in former day . only the and silent senior partner know how thin the veneer be which shine so deceptively upon the surface . many thing have contribute towards this state of affair . the firm have be involve in a succession of misfortune , some know to the world , and other know to no one save the elder . the former have be accept with such perfect stoicism and cheerfulness that they rather increase than diminish the reputation of the concern ; the latter be the more crush , and also the more difficult to bear . line of fine vessel from and from be run to the of , and competition have cut down freightage to the low possible point . where the have once hold almost a monopoly there be now many in the field . again , the negro of the coast be become educate and have a keen eye to business , so that the old profit be no longer obtainable . the day have go by when gun and print could be weigh in the balance against ivory and gold dust . while these general cause be at work a special misfortune have befall the house of . find that their fleet of old sailing vessel be too slow and clumsy to compete with more modern ship , they have buy in two first-rate steamer . one be the , a fine screw vessel of twelve hundred ton , and the other be the , somewhat small in size , but both class a1 at 's . the former cost thousand pound , and the latter seventeen thousand . now , have always have a weakness for petty saving , and in this instance he determine not to insure his new vessel . if the crazy old tub , for which he have pay fancy premium for so many year with an eye to an ultimate profit , meet with no disaster , surely those new powerful clipper be safe . with their tonnage and they appear to him to be superior to all the danger of the deep . it chance , however , by that strange luck which would almost make one believe that matter nautical be at the mercy of some particularly malignant demon , that as the be steam up in a dense fog on her return from her second voyage , she run right into the , which have start that very morning from upon her third outward trip . the be almost cut in two , and sink within five minute , take down the captain and six of the crew , while the be so much damage about the bow that she put into in a sink condition . that day 's work cost the african firm more than five and thirty thousand pound . other mishap have occur to weaken the firm , apart from their trade with the coast . the senior partner have engage in speculation without the knowledge of his son , and the result have be disastrous . one of the cornish tin mine in which he have sink a large amount of money , and which have hitherto yield him a handsome return , become suddenly exhaust , and the share go down to zero . no firm could stand against such a run of bad luck , and the african trading company reel before it . have not say a word yet of all this to his son . as claim arise he settle them in the good manner he could , and postpone the inevitable day when he should have to give a true account of their financial position . he hope against hope that the chapter of accident or the arrival of some brilliant cargo from the coast might set the concern on its leg again . from day to day he have be expect news of one of his vessel . at last one morning he find a telegram await him at the office . he tear it eagerly open , for it bear the madeira mark . it be from his agent , , and announce that the voyage from which he have hope so much have be a total failure . the cargo be hardly sufficient to defray the work expense . as the merchant read it , his head drop over the table and he groan aloud . another of the prop which uphold him from ruin have snap beneath him . there be three letter lie beside the telegram . he glance through them , but there be no consolation in any of them . one be from a bank manager , inform him that his account be somewhat overdraw . another from 's , point out that the policy on two of his vessel would lapse unless pay within a certain date . the cloud be gather very darkly over the african firm , yet the old man bear up against misfortune with dauntless courage . he sit alone in his little room , with his head sink upon his breast , and his thatch draw down over his keen grey eye . it be clear to him that the time have come when he must enlighten his son as to the true state of their affair . with his co-operation he might carry out a plan which have be mature some month in his brain . it be a hard task for the proud and austere merchant to be compel to confess to his son that he have speculate without his knowledge in the capital of the company , and that a large part of that capital have disappear . these speculation in many instance have promise large return , and have withdraw money from safe concern , and reinvest it in the hope of get a high rate of interest . he have do this with his eye open to the risk , and know that his son be of too practical and cautious a nature to embark in such commercial gambling , he have never consult him upon the point , nor have he make any entry of the money so invest in the account of the firm . be entirely ignorant of the danger which hang over them , and his father see that , in order to secure his energetic assistance in the stroke which he be contemplate , it be absolutely necessary that he should know how critical their position be . the old man have hardly come to this conclusion when he hear the sharp footfall of his son in the outer office and the harsh tone of his voice as he address the clerk . a moment or two late the green baize door fly open , and the young man come in , throw his hat and coat down on one of the chair . it be evident that something have ruffle his temper . " , " he say brusquely , nod his head to his father . " , , " the merchant answer meekly . " what be the matter with you , father ? " his son ask , look at him keenly . " you do n't look yourself , and have n't for some time back . " " business worry , my boy , business worry , " answer wearily . " it be the infernal atmosphere of this place , " say impatiently . " i feel it myself sometimes . i wonder you do n't start a little country seat with some ground . just enough to ask a fellow to shoot over , and with a good billiard board , and every convenience of that sort . it would do for us to spend the time from to , and allow us to get some fresh air into our lung . there be plenty of man who ca n't afford it half as well , and yet have something of the sort . what be the use of have a good balance at your banker be , if you do n't live good than your neighbour ? " " there be only one objection to it , " the merchant say huskily , and with a force laugh ; " i have not get a good balance at the banker 's . " " pretty fair , pretty fair , " his son say knowingly , pick up the long thin volume in which the finance of the firm be record and tap it against the table . " but the figure there be not quite correct , , " his father say , still more huskily . " we have not get nearly so much as that . " " what ! " roar the junior partner . " ! for 's sake do n't let the clerk hear you . we have not so much as that . we have very little . in fact , , we have next to nothing in the bank . it be all go . " for a moment the young man stand motionless , glaring at his father . the expression of incredulity which have appear on his feature fade away before the earnestness of the other , and be replace by a look of such malignant passion that it contort his whole face . " you fool ! " he shriek , spring forward with the book upraise as though he would have strike the old merchant . " i see it now . you have be speculate on your own hook , you curse ass ! what have you do with it ? " he seize his father by the collar and shake him furiously in his wrath . " keep your hand off me ! " the senior partner cry , wrench himself free from his son 's grasp . " i do my good with the money . how dare you address me so ? " " do your good ! " hiss , hurl the ledger down on the table with a crash . " what do you mean by speculate without my knowledge , and tell me at the same time that i know all that be do ? have n't i warn you a thousand time of the danger of it ? you be not to be trust with money . " " remember , , " his father say with dignity , himself in the chair from which he have rise , in order to free himself from his son 's clutch , " if i lose the money , i also make it . this be a flourishing concern before you be bear . if the worst come to the bad you be only where i start . but we be far from be absolutely ruin as yet . " " to think of it ! " cry , fling himself upon the office sofa , and bury his face in his hand . " to think of all i have say of our money and our resource ! what will and the fellow at the club say ? how can i alter the way of life that i have learn ? " then , suddenly clench his hand , and turn upon his father he break out , " we must have it back , father ; we must , by fair mean or foul . you must do it , for it be you who lose it . what can we do ? how long have we to do it in ? be this know in the ? oh , i shall be ashamed to show my face on ' . " so he ramble on , by the picture of the future which rise up in his mind . " be calm , , be calm ! " his father say imploringly . " we have many chance yet if we only make the good of them . there be no use lament the past . i freely confess that i be wrong in use this money without your knowledge , but i do it from the good of motive . we must put our head together now to retrieve our loss , and there be many way in which that may be do . i want your clear common sense to help me in the matter . " " pity you do n't apply to that before , " say sulkily . " i have suffer for not do so , " the old man answer meekly . " in consider how to rally under this grievous affliction which have come upon us , we must remember that our credit be a great resource , and one upon which we have never draw . that give us a broad margin to help us while we be carry out our plan for the future . " " what will our credit be worth when this matter leak out ? " " but it ca n't leak out . no one suspect it for a moment . they might imagine that we be suffer from some temporary depression of trade , but no one could possibly know the sad truth . for 's sake do n't you let it out ! " his son break into an impatient oath . a flush come into 's sallow cheek , and his eye sparkle angrily . " be careful how you speak , . there be limit to what i will endure from you , though i make every allowance for your feeling at this sudden catastrophe , for which i acknowledge myself responsible . " the young man shrug his shoulder , and drum his heel against the ground impatiently . " i have more than one plan in my head , " the merchant say , " by which our affair may be re-establish on their old footing . if we can once get sufficient money to satisfy our present creditor , and so tide over this run of bad luck , the current will set in the other way , and all will go well . and , first of all , there be one question , my boy , which i should like to ask you . what do you think of 's daughter ? " " she be right enough , " the young man answer brusquely . " she be a good girl , thoroughly good girl , and a rich girl too , though her money be a small thing in my eye compare to her virtue . " sneer . " of course , " he say impatiently . " well , go about her ? " " just this , , that there be no girl in the world whom i should like well to receive as my daughter-in-law . ah , you rogue ! you could come round her ; you know you could . " the old man poke his long bony finger in the direction of his son 's rib with grim playfulness . " oh , that be the idea , be it ? " remark the junior partner , with a very unpleasant smile . " yes , that be one way out of our difficulty . she have forty thousand pound , which would be more than enough to save the firm . at the same time you would gain a charming wife . " " yes , there be a good many girl about who might make charming wife , " his son remark dubiously . " no matrimony for me yet awhile . " " but it be absolutely necessary , " his father urge . " a very fine necessity , " break in savagely . " i be to tie myself up for life and you be to use all the money in rectify your blunder . it be a very pretty division of labour , be that . " " the business be yours as well as mine . it be your interest to invest the money in it , for if it fail you be as completely ruin as i should be . you think you could win her if you try ? " stroke his dark moustache complacently , and take a momentary glance at his own bold handsome feature in the mirror above the . " if we be reduce to such an expedient , i think i can answer for the result , " he say . " the girl be not a one . but you say you have several plan . let us hear some of the other one . if the worst come to the bad i might consent to condition , of course , that i should have the whole management of the money . " " quite so , " his father say hurriedly . " that be a dear , good lad . as you say , when all other thing fail we can always fall back upon that . at present i intend to raise as much money as i can upon our credit , and invest it in such a manner as to bring in a large and immediate profit . " " and how do you intend to do this ? " his son ask doubtfully . " i intend , " say , solemnly rise up and lean his elbow against the intend to make a corner in diamond . " propound his intention with such dignity and emphasis that he evidently expect the announcement to come as a surprise upon his son . if so , he be not disappoint , for the young man stare open-eyed . " a corner in diamond ! " he repeat . " how will you do that ? " " you know what a corner be , " his father explain . " if you buy up all the cotton , say , or sugar in the market , so as to have the whole of it in your own hand , and to be able to put your own price on it in sell it be call make a corner in sugar or cotton . i intend to make a corner in diamond . " " of course , i know what a corner be , " say impatiently . " but how on earth be you go to buy all the diamond in ? you would want the capital of a ? " " not so much as you think , my boy , for there be not any great amount of diamond in the market at any one time . the yield of the south african field regulate the price . i have have this idea in my head for some time , and have study the detail . of course , i should not attempt to buy in all the diamond that be in the market . a small portion of them would yield profit enough to float the firm off again . " " but if you have only a part of the supply in your hand , how be you to regulate the market value ? you must come down to the price at which other holder be sell . " " ! ! very good ! very good ! " the old merchant say , shake his head good-humouredly . " but you do n't quite see my plan yet . you have not altogether grasp it . allow me to explain it to you . " his son lie back upon the sofa with a look of resignation upon his face . continue to stand upon the hearth-rug and speak very slowly and deliberately , as though give vent to thought which have be long and carefully consider . " you see , , " he say , " diamond , be a commodity of great value , of which there be never very much in the market at one time , be extremely sensitive to all sort of influence . the value of them vary greatly from time to time . a very little thing serve to depreciate their price , and an equally small thing will send it up again . " grunt to show that he follow his father 's remark . " i do some business in diamond myself when i be a young man , and so i have an opportunity of observe their fluctuation in the market . now , there be one thing which invariably depreciate the price of diamond . that be the rumour of fresh discovery of mine in other part of the world . the instant such a thing get wind the value of the stone go down wonderfully . the discovery of diamond in not long ago have that effect very markedly , and they have never recover their value since . do you follow me ? " an expression of interest have come over 's face , and he nod to show that he be listen . " now , suppose , " continue the senior partner , with a smile on his thin lip , " that such a report get about . suppose , too , that we be at this time , when the market be in a depressed condition , to invest a considerable capital in them . if these rumour of an alleged discovery turn out to be entirely unfounded , of course the value of the stone which we hold would go up once more , and we might very well sell out for double or treble the sum that we invest . do n't you see the sequence of event ? " " there seem to me to be rather too much of the ' suppose ' in it , " remark . " how do we know that such rumour will get about ; and if they do , how do we know that they will prove to be unfounded ? " " how be we to know ? " the merchant cry , wriggle his long lank body with amusement . " why , my lad , if we spread the rumour ourselves we shall have pretty good reason to believe that they be unfounded . , ? ! ! you see there be some brain in the old man yet . " look at his father in considerable surprise and some admiration . " why , damn it ! " he exclaim , " it be dishonest . i be not sure that it be not actionable . " " dishonest ! ! " the merchant snap his finger . " it be finesse , my boy , commercial finesse . who be to trace it , i should like to know . i have n't work out all the want your co-operation over here be a rough sketch of my plan . we send a man we can depend upon to some distant part of the , for example , or the . it do n't matter where , as long as it be out of the way . on arrive at this place our agent start a report that he have discover a diamond mine . we should even go the length , if he consider it necessary , of hide a few rough stone in the earth , which he can dig up to give colour to his story . of course the local press would be full of this . he might present one of the diamond to the editor of the near paper . in course of time a pretty colour description of the new diamond field would find its way to and thence to the . i will answer for it that the immediate effect be a great drop in the price of stone . we should have a second agent at the diamond field , and he would lay our money out by buy in all that he could while the panic last . then , the original scare have prove to be all a mistake , the price naturally go up once more , and we get a long figure for all that we hold . that be what i mean by make ' a corner in diamond . ' there be no room in it for any miscalculation . it be as certain as a proposition of , and as easily work out . " " it sound very nice , " his son remark thoughtfully . " i be not so sure about its working , though . " " it must work well . as far as human calculation can go there be no possibility of failure . besides , my boy , never lose sight of the fact that we shall be speculate with other people 's money . we ourselves have nothing to lose , absolutely nothing . " " i be not likely to lose sight of it , " say angrily , his mind come back to his grievance . " i reckon that we can raise from forty to fifty thousand pound without much difficulty . my name be , as you know , as good as that of any firm in the . for nearly forty year it have be above stain or suspicion . if we carry on our plan at once , and lie this money out judiciously , all may come right . " " it be 's choice , " the young man remark . " we must try some bold stroke of the sort . have you choose the right sort of man for agent ? you should have man of some standing to set such report go . they would have more weight then . " shake his head despondingly . " how be i to get a man of any standing to do such a piece of business ? " he say . " nothing easy , " answer , with a cynical laugh . " i could pick out a score of impecunious fellow from the club who would be only too glad to earn a hundred or two in any way you can mention . all their talk about honour and so forth be very pretty and edify , but it be not mean for every day use . of course we should have to pay him . " " them , you mean ? " " no , we should only want one man . " " how about our purchaser at the diamond field ? " " you do n't mean to say , " say roughly , " that you would be so absurd as to trust any man with our money . why , i would n't let the archbishop of out of my sight with forty thousand pound of mine . no , i shall go myself to the diamond be , if i can trust you here alone . " " that be unkind , , " say his father . " your idea be an excellent one . i should have propose it myself but for the discomfort and hardship of such a journey . " " there be no use do thing by half , " the young man remark . " as to our other agent , i have the very . he be a shrewd , clever fellow , and he be always hard up . last week he want to borrow a tenner from me . the job would be a godsend to him , and his social rank would be a great help to our plan . i will answer for his jump at the idea . " " sound him on the subject , then . " " i will . " " i be glad , " say the old merchant , " that you and i have have this conversation , . the fact of my have speculate without your knowledge , and deceive you by a false ledger , have often weigh heavily upon my conscience , i assure you . it be a relief to me to have tell you all . " " drop the subject , then , " say curtly . " i must put up with it , for i have no redress . the thing be do and nothing can undo it ; but i consider that you have willfully waste the money . " " believe me , i have try to act for the good . the good name of our firm be everything to me . i have spend my whole life in build it up , and if the day should come when it must go , i trust that i may have go myself . there be nothing which i would not do to preserve it . " " i see they want our premium , " say , glance at the open letter upon the table . " how be it that none of those ship go down ? that would give us help . " " ! hush ! " cry imploringly . " speak in a whisper when you talk of such thing . " " i ca n't understand you , " say petulantly . " you persistently your ship , year after year . look at the ; it be put at more than twice what she be worth as new . and the , i dare say , be about the same . yet you never have an accident with them , while your two new uninsured clipper run each other down . " " well , what more can i do ? " reply the merchant " they be thoroughly rotten . i have do nothing for them for year . sooner or later they must go . i can do any more . " " i will make ' em go down quick enough , " mutter , with an oath . " why do n't you make old bear a hole in them , or put a light to a barrel of paraffin ? bless your soul ! the thing have do every day . what be the use of be about it ? " " no , no , ! " cry his father . " not that . it be one thing let matter take their course , and it be another thing give positive order to scuttle a ship . besides , it would put us in ' power . it would be too dangerous . " " please yourself , " say , with a sneer . " you have get us into the mess and you must take us out again . if the worst come to the bad i will tell you what i will do . i will marry , wash my hand of the firm , leave you to settle matter with the creditor , and retire with the forty thousand pound ; " with which threat the junior partner take up his hat and swagger out of the office . after his departure , spend an hour in anxious thought , arrange the detail of the scheme which he have just submit to his son . as he sit , his eye chance to fall upon the two letter lie on his desk , and it strike him that they have well be attend to . it do not suit his plan to fall back upon his credit just yet . it have be already show that he be a man of ready resource . he ring the bell and summon his senior clerk . " good morning , , " he say affably . " good morning , , good morning , sir , " say wizened little , rub his thin yellow hand together , as a sign of his gratification . " i hear , , that you have come into a legacy lately , " say . " yes , sir . fifteen hundred pound , sir . less legacy duty and incidental expense , fourteen hundred and six and fourpence . my wife 's brother leave it , sir , and a very handsome legacy too . " smile with the indulgent smile of one to whom such a sum be absolutely nothing . " what have you do with the money , then , ? " he ask carelessly . " bank it , sir , in the . " " in the , ? let me see . their present rate of interest be three and a half ? " " , sir , " say . " three ! me , , that be poor interest , very poor indeed . it be most fortunate that i make these inquiry . i be on the point of draw fourteen hundred pound from one of my correspondent as a temporary convenience . for this i should pay him five per cent . i have no objection , , as you be an old servant of the firm , to give you the preference in this matter . i can take more than fourteen i shall be happy to accommodate you up to that sum at the rate name . " be overwhelm by this thoughtful and considerate act . " it be really too generous and kind , sir , " he say . " i do n't know how to thank you . " " do n't mention it , , " the senior partner say grandly . " the firm be always glad to advance the interest of its employee in any reasonable manner . have you your cheque-book with you ? fill it up for fourteen hundred . no more , ; i can oblige you by take any more . " the head clerk have make out his cheque for the amount , and have sign his name to it in a cramped little quaint handwriting , which remind one of his person , be duly present with a receipt and dismiss to his counting-house . there he entertain the other clerk by a glowing description of the magnanimity of his employer . take some sheet of blue official paper from a drawer , and his quill pen travel furiously over them with many a screech and splutter . " , " he say to the bank manager , " i enclose fourteen hundred pound , which represent the loose cash about the office . i shall make a heavy deposit presently . in the meantime , you will , of course , honour anything that may be present . -- truly , . " to 's he write : -- , -- you will find cheque for @card@ pound seven shilling and sixpence , be amount due as premium on the , , and of . should have forward cheque before , but with so many thing of importance to look after these trifle be liable to be overlook . " these two epistle have be seal , address , and despatch , the elder begin to feel somewhat more easy in his mind , and to devote himself once more to the innocent amusement of plan how a corner might good be create in diamond . 's private residence in be a large and substantial house in a district which the wave of fashion have pass over in its westward course . it might still , however , be say to be cover by a deposit of eminent respectability . the building be stern and hard , and massive in its external appearance , but the interior be luxury itself , for the old merchant , in spite of his ascetic appearance , be incline to be a sybarite at heart , and have a due appreciation of the good thing of this world . indeed , there be an oriental and almost barbarous splendour about the great room , where the rich of furniture be intersperse with skin from the , ivory from , and the thousand other strange valuable which be present by his agent to the african trader . after the death of his friend , have be as good as his word . he have take away from the desolate house at and bring her to live with him . from the garret of that palatial edifice to the cellar she be at liberty to roam where she would , and do what she choose . the square garden too , with its smoke-dried tree and fade lawn , be at her disposal , in which she might walk , or work , or read . no care or responsibility be impose upon her . the domestic affair be superintend by a stern housekeeper , who bear a quaint resemblance to himself in petticoat , and who arrange every detail of housekeeping . the young girl have apparently only to exist and to be happy . yet the latter item be not so easy as it might seem . it be not a congenial atmosphere . her whole society consist of the stern , unemotional merchant and his vulgar , occasionally brutal , son . at first , while the memory of her father be still fresh , she feel her new surroundings acutely , contrast , as they do , with her happy home . gradually , however , as time deaden the sting , she come to accommodate herself to circumstance . the two man leave her very much to her own device . be so engross in his business that he have little time to inquire into her pursuit , and , be addict to late hour , be seldom see except at , when she listen with awe to his sporting slang and cynical comment upon man and manner . have be by no mean overjoy upon the return of the from to learn that his ward have be throw into the company of her young cousin . he receive her coldly and forbid her to visit for some time to come . he take occasion also to speak of , and to assure her that he have receive very serious account as to his spiritual state . " he be addict to all manner of debase pursuit , " he remark , " and it be my particular wish that you should avoid him . " learn that young be in , he even take the precaution of tell off a confidential footman to walk behind her on all occasion , and to act either as an escort or as a sentry . it chance , however , that one day , a few week after her return , find an opportunity of recover her freedom . the footman have be despatch upon some other duty , so she bethink herself that a book be to be buy and some lace to be match , and several other important feminine duty to be fulfill . it happen , however , that as she walk sedately down , her eye fall upon a very tall and square-shouldered young man , who be lounge in her direction , tap his stick listlessly against the railing , as be the habit of idle man . at this forget incontinently all about the book and the lace , while the tall youth cease to tap the railing , and come stride towards her with long springy footstep and a smile face . " why , who would have think of meet you here ? " she exclaim , when the first greeting have be exchange . " it be a most surprising thing . " it be possible that the incident would not have strike her as so very astonishing after all , have she know that have spend six hour a day for the last fortnight in blockade the entrance to . " most remarkable ! " say the young hypocrite . " you see , i have n't anything to do yet , so i walk about a good deal . it be a lucky chance that send me in this direction . " " and how be the doctor ? " ask eagerly . " and , how be she ? you must give my love to them both . " " how be it that you have never be to see us ? " ask reproachfully . " think that i have be too idle lately , and that i should stay at home . i be afraid it will be some little time before i can steal away to . " consign her guardian under his breath to a region warmer even than the scene of that gentleman 's commercial speculation . " which way be you go ? " he ask . " i be go to to change my book , and then to . " " what a strange thing ! " the young man exclaim ; " i be go in that direction too . " it seem the more strange , as he be walk in the opposite direction when she meet him . neither seem incline to make any comment upon the fact , so they walk on together . " and you have not forget the day in yet ? " ask , after a long pause . " no , indeed , " his companion answer with enthusiasm . " i shall never forget them as long as i live . " " nor i , " say earnestly . " you remember the day we have at the ? " " and the drive round 's . " " and the time that we all go to and see the chapel . " " and the day at when we see the jewel and the armoury . but you must have see all these thing many time before ? you could not have enjoy it as much as we do for the first time . " " oh yes , i do , " say stoutly , wonder to himself how it be that the easy grace with which he could turn compliment to maiden for whom he care nothing have so entirely desert him . " you see , be not there when i see them before . " " ah , " say demurely , " what a beautiful day it be ? i fancy in the morning that it be go to rain . " be not to be divert from his subject by any meteorological observation . " perhaps some time your guardian will allow the dad to take you on another little holiday , " he say hopefully . " i be afraid he wo n't , " answer . " why not ? " " because he seem so cross when i come back this last time . " " why be he cross ? " ask . " -- " she be about to say that it be because she have be bring in contact with him ; but she recollect herself in time . " because what ? " " because he happen to be in a bad temper , " she answer . " it be too bad that you should have to submit to any one 's whim and temper , " the young man say , switch his stick angrily backwards and forwards . " why not ? " she ask , laugh . " everybody have some one over them . if you have n't , you would never know right from wrong . " " but he be unkind to you . " " no , indeed , " say , with decision . " he be really very kind to me . he may appear a little stern at time , but i know that he mean it for my own good , and i should be a very foolish girl if i resent it . besides , he be so pious and good that what may seem a little fault to us would appear a great thing in his eye . " " oh , he be very pious and good , then , " remark , in a doubtful voice . his shrewd old father have form his own view as to 's character , and his son have in due course imbibe them from him . " yes , of course he be , " answer , look up with great wonder eye . " do n't you know that he be the chief supporter of the of the , and sit in the front pew three time every ? " " ah ! " say . " yes , and subscribe to all the charitable fund , and be a friend of , the great philanthropist . besides , look how good he have be to me . he have take the place of my father . " " hum ! " say dubiously ; and then , with a little pang at his heart , " do you like too ? " " no , indeed , " cry his companion with energy . " i do n't like him in the least . he be a cruel , man . " " cruel ! you do n't mean cruel to you , of course . " " no , not to me . i avoid him as much as i can , and sometimes for week we hardly exchange a word . do you know what he do the other day ? it make me shudder even to think of it . i hear a cat cry pitifully in the garden , so i go out to see what be the matter . when i get outside i see lean out of a window with a gun in his of those which do n't make any noise when they go off . and there , in the middle of the garden , be a poor cat that he have tie to a bush , and he have be practise at it for ever so long . the poor creature be still alive , but oh ! so dreadfully injure . " " the brute ! what do you do ? " " i untie it and bring it inside , but it die during the night . " " and what do he say ? " " he put up his gun while i be untie it , as if he have half a mind to take a shot at me . when i meet him afterwards he say that he would teach me to mind my own business . i do n't mind what he say though , as long as i have the cat . " " speak like that , do he ? " say savagely , flush up to his eye . " i wish i see him now . i will teach him manner , -- " " you will certainly get run over if you go on like that , " interrupt . indeed , the young man in his indignation be stride over a crossing without the slight heed of the imminent danger which he run from the stream of traffic . " do n't be so excitable , , " she say , lay her glove hand upon his arm ; " there be nothing to be cross about . " " be n't there ? " he answer furiously . " it be a pretty state of thing that you should have to submit to insult from a brutal puppy like that fellow . " the pair have manage by this time to get half-way across the broad road , and be halt upon the little island of safety form by the great stone base of a lamp-post . an interminable stream of ' , purple , and van , hansom , and growler , block the way in front of them . a single policeman , with his back turn to them , and his two arm go like an animated semaphore , be the only human be in their immediate vicinity . amid all the roar and rattle of the huge city they be as thoroughly leave to themselves as though they be in the centre of . " you must have a protector , " say with decision . " oh , , do n't be foolish ; i can protect myself very well . " " you must have some one who have a right to look after you . " the young man 's voice be husky , for the back part of his throat have become unaccountably dry of a sudden . " you can pass now , sir , " roar the constable , for there be a momentary break in the traffic . " do n't go for a moment , " cry , desperately detain his companion by the sleeve of her jacket . " we be alone here and can talk . do n't you n't you think you could like me a little bit if you be to try ? i love you so , , that i can help hope that my love be not all lose . " " all clear now , sir , " shout the constable once more . " do n't mind him , " say , still detain her on the . " since i meet you in , , i have seem to be walk in a dream . do what i will , go where i will , i still have you before my eye and hear your sweet voice in my ear . i do n't believe any girl be ever love more dearly than i love you , but i find it so hard to put into word the thought that i have in my mind . for 's sake , give me some little gleam of hope to carry away with me . you do n't dislike me , , do you ? " " you know that i do n't , , " say the young lady , with downcast eye . he have corner her so skilfully against the great lamp that she could move neither to the right nor to the left . " do you like me , then , ? " he ask eagerly , with a loving light in his earnest grey eye . " of course i do . " " do you think you could love me ? " continue this persistent young man . " i do n't mean all at once , and in a moment , because i know very well that i be not worthy of it . but in time do n't you think you could come to love me ? " " perhaps , " murmur , with avert face . it be such a very little murmur that it be wonderful that it should be audible at all ; yet it peal in the young man 's ear above the rattle and the clatter of the busy street . his head be very near to hers at the time . " now be your time , sir , " roar the semaphoric policeman . have be in a less exposed position it be possible that he might have act upon that well-timed remark from the cunning constable . the centre of a crossing be not , however , a very advantageous spot for the performance of love passage . as they walk on , thread their way among the vehicle , take his companion 's hand in his , and they exchange one firm grip , which each feel to be of the nature of a pledge . how sunny and bright the dull street appear to those two young people that afternoon . they be both look into a future which seem to be one long vista of happiness and love . of all the gift of , surely our want of knowledge of the thing which be to come upon us be the most merciful , and the one we could least dispense with ! so happy and so light-hearted be these two lover that it be not until they find themselves in once more that they come down from the cloud , and realize that there be some commonplace detail which must be deal with in one way or another . " of course , i may tell my own people , dear , about our engagement ? " say . " i wonder what your mother will say ? " answer , laugh merrily . " she will be awfully astonish . " " how about ? " ask . the thought of the guardian have never occur to either of them before . they stare at each other , and 's face assume such an expression of dismay that her companion burst out laugh . " do n't be frighten , darling , " he say . " if you like , i will go in ' beard the lion in his den . ' there be no time like the present . " " no , no , dear , " she cry eagerly . " you must not do that . " it be impossible for her to tell him how especially have caution her against him , but she feel that it would never do to allow the two to meet . " we must conceal our engagement from . " " conceal our engagement ! " " yes , . he have warn me so often against anything of the sort , that really i do n't know what he would do if he know about it . he would certainly make it very uncomfortable for me to live with him . remember i be nearly twenty now , so in a little more than a year i shall be entirely free . that be not very long . " " i do n't know about that , " say doubtfully . " however , if you will be more comfortable , of course that settle the question . it seem rather hard , though , that we should have to conceal it , simply in order to pacify this old bear . " " it be only for a time , ; and you may tell them at home by all mean . now , good-bye , dear ; they will see you from the window if you come near . " " good-bye , my darling . " they shake hand and part , he hurry away with the glad tidings to , she trip back to her captivity with the light heart that she have feel for a weary time . passer-by glance back at the bright little face under the bright little bonnet , and , look down at her from the drawing-room window , bethink him that if the diamond speculation should fail it would be no hardship to turn to his father 's word . the revelation of the real state of the firm 's finance be a terrible blow to . to a man of his overbearing , tempestuous disposition failure and poverty be bitter thing to face . he have be wont to tread down before him all such little difficulty and obstacle as come across him in his former life . now he encounter a great barrier which could not be pass so easily , and he rage and chafe before it . it make him still more wroth to think that the fault be none of his . all his life he have reckon , as a matter of course , that when his father pass away he would be leave almost a millionaire . a single half-hour 's conversation have shatter this delusion and leave him face to face with ruin . he lose his sleep and become restless and hollow-eyed . once or twice he be see the bad for drink in the daytime . he be a man of strong character , however , and though somewhat demoralize by the sudden shock , he throw away no point in the game which he and his father be play . he see clearly that only a bold stroke could save them . he therefore throw himself heart and soul into the diamond scheme , and work out the detail in a masterly manner . the more he look into it the more convinced he become , not only of its feasibility , but of its absolute safety . it seem as though it be hardly possible that it should fail . among other thing he proceed to qualify himself as a dealer in diamond . it happen that he be acquaint with one of the partner of the firm of & , who do the large import trade in precious stone . through his kindness he receive practical instruction in the variety and value of diamond , and learn to detect all those little flaw and peculiarity which be only visible to the eye of an expert , and yet be of the high importance in the price of a stone . with such opportunity make rapid progress , and within a few week there be not many dealer in the trade who have a good grasp of the subject . both the recognize that the success of their plan depend very largely upon their choice of an agent , and both be of the opinion that in they have just the man that they be in want of . the young merchant have long feel vaguely that the major 's social position , combine with his impecuniosity and the looseness of his morality , as infer from his mode of life , might some day make him a valuable agent under delicate circumstance . as to the old soldier 's own inclination , flatter himself that he know the man 's nature to a nicety . it be simply a question of the price to be pay . no doubt the figure would be substantial , but he recognize with a trader 's instinct that the article be a superior one , and he be content to allow for the quality in estimate the value . early one afternoon the major be strut down 's , and , with protuberant chest and glitter shoe which peep out from beneath the dainty of gaiter . , who have be on the look-out from a club window , run across and intercept him . " how be you , my dear major ? " he cry , advance upon him with outstretch hand and as much show of geniality as his nature permit . " how do ? how do ? " say the other somewhat pompously . he have make up his mind that nothing be to be do with the young man , and yet he be reluctant to break entirely with one whose purse be well line and who have sporting proclivity . " i have be wish to speak with you for some day , major , " say . " when could i see you ? " " you will see me any plain than you do at this very moment , " the old soldier answer , take a sidelong glance of suspicion at his companion . " ah , but i wish to speak to you quietly on a matter of business , " the young merchant persist . " it be a delicate matter which may need some talk over , and , above all , it be a private matter . " " ! " say the major , with a wheezy laugh , " you will have think i want to borrow money if i have say as much . look here now , we will go into 's private billiard-room , and i will let you have two out of five for a it be as good as hand you the money to offer you such odd . you can talk this over while we play . " " no , no , major , " urge the junior partner . " i tell you it be a matter of the great importance to both of us . can you meet me at 's at four o'clock ? i know the manager , and he will let us have a private room . " " i will ask you round to me own little place , " the major say , " but it be rather too far . 's at four . right you be ! ' be next to godliness , ' as of the buff use to say . you do n't know , ? gad , he be second to a man at in ' @card@ . he bring his man on the ground , but the opponent do n't turn up . two minute after time want his man to leave . ' ' em punctuality , ' he say . ' ca n't be do , ' say his man . ' must be do , ' say . ' out of the question , ' say the man , and would n't budge . persist ; there be high word and a quarrel . the put ' em up at fifteen pace , and the man shoot through the calf of the leg . he be a martyr to punctuality . four , bye ! " the major nod pleasantly and swagger away , flourish his little cane jauntily in the air . in spite of his admiration of punctuality , as exemplify in the person of of the buff , the major take good care to arrive at the somewhat behind the appoint time . it be clear to him that some service or other be expect of him , and it be obviously his game therefore to hang back and not appear to be too eager to enter into young 's view . when he present himself at the entrance of 's the young merchant have be fume and chafe in the sitting-room for five and twenty minute . it be a dingy apartment , with a single large chair and half a dozen small wooden , place with mathematical precision along the wall . a square table in the centre and a shabby mirror over the mantelpiece complete the furniture . with the instinct of an old campaigner the major immediately drop into the , and , lean luxuriously back , take a cigar from his case and proceed to light it . seat himself near the table and twist his dark moustache , as be his habit when collect himself . " what will you drink ? " he ask , " anything that be go . " " fetch in a decanter of brandy and some seltzer water , " say to the waiter ; " then shut the door and leave us entirely to ourselves . " when the liquor be place upon the table he drink off his first glass at a gulp , and then refill it . the major place his upon the mantelpiece beside him without taste it . both be endeavour to be at their good and clear in the come interview , and each set about it in his own manner . " i will tell you why i want to have a chat with you , major , " say , have first open the door suddenly and glance out as a precaution against eavesdropper . " i have to be cautious , because what i have to say affect the interest of the firm . i would n't for the world have any one know about it except yourself . " " what be it , me boy ? " the major ask , with languid curiosity , puff at his weed and stare up at the ceiling . " you understand that in commercial speculation the least breath of information beforehand may mean a loss of thousand on thousand . " the major nod his head as a sign that he appreciate this fact . " we have a difficult enterprise on which we be about to embark , " say , lean forward and sink his voice almost to a whisper . " it be one which will need great skill and tact , though it may be make to pay well if properly manage . you follow me ? " his companion nod once more . " for this enterprise we require an agent to perform one of the principal part . this agent must possess great ability , and , at the same time , be a man on whom we can thoroughly rely . of course we do not expect to find such quality without pay for them . " the major grunt a hearty acquiescence . " my father , " continue , " want to employ one of our own man . we have number who be capable in every way of manage the business . i interfere , however . i say that i have a good friend , name , who be well qualify for the position . i mention that you be of the blood of the old king . be i not right ? " " you be not . milesian , sir ; milesian ! " " ah , milesian . it be all the same . " " it be nothing of the sort , " say the major indignantly . " i mean it be all the same to my father . he would n't know the difference . well , i tell him of your high descent , and that you be a traveller , a soldier , and a man of steady and trustworthy habit . " " ? " ejaculate the major involuntarily . " well , all right . go on ! " " i tell him all this , " say slowly , " and i point out to him that the sum of money which he be prepare to lay out would be well expend on such a man than on one who have no virtue beyond those of business . " " i do n't give you credit for so much ! " his companion exclaim with enthusiasm . " i say to him that if the matter be leave entirely in your hand we could rely upon its be do thoroughly . at the same time , we should have the satisfaction of know that the substantial sum which we be prepare to pay our agent have come into worthy hand . " " you hit it there again , " murmur the veteran . " you be prepare , then , " say , glance keenly at him , " to put yourself at our order on condition that you be well pay for it ? " " not so fast , me young friend , not so fast ! " say the major , take his cigar from between his lip and let the blue smoke curl round his head . " let be hear what it be that you want me to do , and then i be to say what i will agree to and what i wo n't . i in -- " " ! " cry impatiently . " that have be do already , " observe the major calmly . " lynch for in ' @card@ . however , go on , and i will promise not to stop you until you have finish . " thus encourage , proceed to unfold the plan upon which the fortune of the of depend . not a word do he say of ruin or danger , or the reason which have induce this speculation . on the contrary , he depict the affair of the firm as be in a most nourish condition , and this venture as simply a small insignificant offshoot from their business , undertake as much for amusement as for any serious purpose . still , he lay stress upon the fact that though the sum in question be a small one to the firm , yet it be a very large one in other man 's eye . as to the morality of the scheme , that be a point which omit entirely to touch upon . any comment upon that would , he feel , be superfluous when deal with such a man as his companion . " and now , major , " he conclude , " provide you lend us your name and your talent to help us in our speculation , the firm be prepare to meet you in a most liberal spirit in the matter of remuneration . of course your voyage and your expense will be handsomely pay . you will have to travel by steamer to , provide that we choose the as the scene of our imaginary find . i hear that there be high play go on aboard these boat , and with your well-known skill you will no doubt be able to make the voyage a remunerative one . we calculate that at the most you will be in about three month . now , the firm think that it would be very fair if they be to guarantee you two hundred and fifty pound , which they would increase to five hundred in case of success ; of course by that we mean complete success , such as would be likely to attend your exertion . " now , have there be any third person in the room during this long statement of the young merchant be , and have that third person be a man of observation , he might have remark several peculiarity in the major 's demeanour . at the commencement of the address he might have pose as the very model and type of respectable composure . as the plan be gradually unfold , however , the old soldier begin to puff hard at his cigar until a continuous thick grey cloud rise up from him , through which the lurid tip of the shine like a murky meteor . from time to time he pass his hand down his puffy cheek , as be his custom when excite . then he move uneasily in his chair , clear his throat huskily , and show other sign of restlessness , all of which be hail by as unmistakable proof of the correctness of his judgment and of the not unnatural eagerness of the veteran on hearing of the windfall which chance have place in his way . when the young man have finish , the major stand up with his face to the empty , his leg apart , his chest inflate , and his body rock ponderously backwards and forwards . " let me be quite sure that i understand you , " he say . " you wish me to go to ? " " quite so , " remark , rub his hand pleasantly . " you have the goodness to that on me way i should rook me in the boat ? " " that be to say , if you think it worth your while . " " quite so , if i think it worth me while . i be then to across the to some -- " " the . " " and there i be to to discover certain diamond mine , and am to give weight to me story by the fact that i be know to be a man of good birth , and also by exhibit some rough stone which you wish me to take out with me from ? " " quite right , major , " say encouragingly . " i be then to or write this lie to and git it insert in the paper ? " " that be an ugly word , " remonstrate . " this ' report ' we will say . a report may be either true or false , you know . " " and by this report , thin , " the major continue , " you reckon that the market will be so affect that your father and you will be able to buy and sell in a manner that will be profitable to you , but by which you will do other people out of their money ? " " you have an unpleasant way of put it , " say , with a force laugh ; " but you have the idea right . " " i have another idea as well , " roar the old soldier , flush purple with passion . " i have an idea that if i be year young i will see whether you will fit through that window , . ! i will have teach you to propose such a to a man with blue blood in his vein , you ! " fall back in his chair . he be outwardly compose , but there be a dangerous glitter in his eye , and his face have turn from a healthy olive to a dull yellow tint . " you wo n't do it ? " he gasp . " do it ! think that a man who have wear her 's scarlet jacket for year would dirty his hand with such a trick ? i tell , i would n't do it for all the money that be coin . look here , , i know you , but , by the , you do n't know me ! " the young merchant sit silently in his chair , with the same livid colour upon his face and savage expression in his eye . stand at the end of the table , stoop forward so as to lean his hand upon it , with his eye protuberant and his scanty grey fringe in a bristle with indignation . " what right have you to come to me with such a proposal ? i do n't set up for be a saint , know , but , be ! i have some moral , such as they be , and i mean to stick to them . one of me rule of life have be to know a , and so , me young friend , from this day forth you and i go on our own road . ! i be not particular , but ' you must draw the line somewhere , ' as me , , of the , use to say i when he cut his father-in-law . i draw it at you . " while the major be solemnly deliver himself of these sentiment , continue to sit watch him in a particularly venomous manner . his straight , cruel lip be blanch with passion , and the vein stand out upon his forehead . the young man be a famous amateur bruiser , and could fight a round with any professional in . the old soldier would be a child in his hand . as the latter pick up his hat preparatory to leave the room , rise and bolt the door upon the inside . " it be worth five pound in a police court , " he mutter to himself , and knot up his great hand , which glitter with ring , he approach his companion with his head sink upon his breast , his eye flash from under his dark brow , and the slow , stealthy step of a beast of prey . there be a characteristic refinement of cruelty about his attack , as though he wish to gloat over the helplessness of his victim , and give him time to realize his position before he set upon him . if such be his intention he fail signally in produce the desire effect . the instant the major perceive his manoeuvre he pull himself up to his full height , as he might have do on parade , and slip his hand beneath the tail of his frock-coat , produce a small glitter implement , which he level straight at the young merchant 's head . " a revolver ! " gasp , stagger back . " no , a derringer , " say the veteran blandly . " i get into the of carry one when i be in , and i have stick to it ever since . you know when it may be useful . " as he speak he continue to hold the black muzzle of his pistol in a dead line with the centre of the young man 's forehead , and to follow the latter 's movement with a hand which be as steady as a rock . be no coward , but he cease his advance and stand irresolute . " now , thin , " cry the major , in sharp military accent , " undo that door . " the young merchant take one look at the threatening apoplectic face of his antagonist , and another at the ugly black spot which cover him . he stoop , and push back the bolt . " now , open it ! , if you do n't look alive i will have to blow a hole in you all . you would n't be the first man i have kill , nor the last maybe . " open the door precipitately . " now walk before me into the . " it strike the waiter at 's well-known restaurant as a somewhat curious thing that their two customer should walk out with such very grave face and in so unsociable a manner . " anglaise ! " remark little to a fellow exile as they pause in the lay of table to observe the phenomenon . neither of them notice that the stout gentleman behind with his hand place jauntily in the breast of his coat , be still clutch the brown handle of a pistol . there be a hansom standing at the door and step into it . " look here , , " he say , as the latter stand look sulkily up and down the street . " you should learn a lesson from this . never attack a man unless you be sure that he be unarm . you may git shot , if you do . " continue to stare gloomily into vacancy and take no notice of his late companion 's remark . " another thing , " say the major . " you must take it for grant that every man you mate be as great a as yourself . " the young merchant give him a malignant glance from his dark eye and be turn to go , but the gentleman in the cab stretch out his hand to detain him . " one more lesson , " he say . " never funk a pistol unless you be sure there be a inside . mine have n't . drive on , cabby ! " with which parting shoot the gallant major rattle away down with a fix determination never again to leave his room without a few of be no 4 central fire in his pocket . there be in over 's engagement , for the two old people be both heartily fond of , " as they be wont proudly to call her . the physician chafe at first over the idea of keep the matter a secret from . a little reflection serve to show him , however , that there be nothing to be gain by inform him , while 's life , during the time that she be force to remain under his roof , would be more tolerable as long as he be keep in ignorance of it . in the meanwhile the lover see little of each other , and be only console by the thought that every day which pass bring him near to the time when he could claim his prise without concealment or fear . he go about as happy and as light-hearted a man as any in all . his mother be delight at his high spirit , but his bluff old father be not so well satisfy . " confound the lad ! " he say to himself . " he be settle down to a life of idleness . it suit him too well . we must get him to choose one way or the other . " accordingly , after breakfast one morning , the doctor ask his son to step with him into the library , where he light his long pipe , as be his custom after every meal , and smoke for some time in silence . " you must do something to keep you from mischief , my boy , " he say at last brusquely . " i be ready for anything , dad , " reply , " but i do n't quite see what i be fit for . " " first of all , what do you think of this ? " the doctor ask abruptly , hand a letter over to his son , who open it and read as follow : -- - " , -- - " it have come to my knowledge through my son that your boy have abandon the study of medicine , and that you be still uncertain as to his future career . i have long have the intention of seek a young man who might join in our business , and relieve my old shoulder of some of the burden . urge me to write and propose that your son should become one of us . if he have any taste for business we shall be happy to advance his interest in every way . he would , of course , have to purchase a share in the concern , which would amount to seven thousand pound , on which he would be pay interest at the rate of five per cent . by allow this interest to accumulate , and invest also his share of the profit , he might in time absorb a large portion of the business . in case he join us upon this footing we should have no objection to his name appear as one of the firm . should the idea commend itself to you , i should be most happy to talk over detail , and to explain to you the advantage which the firm can offer , at my office in , any day between ten and four . " " with kind regard to your family , and hope that they enjoy the great blessing of health , i remain sincerely yours , " " . " " what think of that ? " the doctor ask , when his son have finish read it . " i hardly know , " say ; " i should like a little time to think it over . " " seven thousand pound be a good round sum . it be more than half the total capital which i have invest for you . on the other hand , i have hear those who ought to know say there be not a sound or good managed concern in . there be no time like the present , . get your hat , and we will go down to together and look into it . " while father and son be rattle along in a cab from to the , the young man have time to turn the matter over in his mind . he want to be at work , and why not take this up as well as anything else . it be true that he dislike what he have see of both the , but , on the other hand , by become a member of the firm he would probably be throw in the way of meet the old merchant 's ward . this last consideration decide the matter , and long before the cab have pull up at the long and dirty passage which lead to the office of the great african firm , the party principally interested have fully make up his mind as to the course he should adopt . they be duly usher into the small sanctum adorn with the dissected ship , the map , the chart , the list of sailing , and the water-colour picture of the barque , where they be receive by the head of the firm . with a charming personal modesty , temper by a become pride in the great business which he have himself create , he discourse upon its transaction and its importance . he take down ledger and flash great row of figure before the eye of the good doctor , explain , at the same time , how month after month their receipt increase and their capital grow . then he speak touchingly of his own ripe year , and of the quiet and seclusion which he look forward to after his busy lifetime . " with my young friend here , " he say , pat affectionately on the shoulder , " and my own boy , both work together , there will be young blood and life in the concern . they will bring the energy , and when they want advice they can come to the old man for it . i intend in a year or so , when the new arrangement work smoothly , to have a run over to . it may seem a weakness to you , but all my life i have hope some day to stand upon that holy ground , and to look down on those scene which we have all imagine to ourselves . your son will start with a good position and a fair income , which he will probably double before he be five year old . the money invest by him be simply to ensure that he shall have a substantial interest in promote the affair of the firm . " thus the old man run on , and when and his father leave the office with the sound of great sum of money , and huge profit , and heavy balance , and safe investment , all jostle each other in their brain , they have both make up their mind as to the future . hence in a couple of day there be a stir in the legal house of , , & , with much rustle of parchment , and sign of name , and drinking of inferior sherry . the result of all which be that the firm of & be seven thousand pound the rich , and find himself a recognize member of a great commercial house with all the right and privilege appertain thereto . " a good day 's work , , " say the old doctor , as they leave the lawyer 's office together . " you have now take an irrevocable step in life , my boy . the world be before you . you belong to a first-class firm and you have every chance . may you thrive and prosper . " " if i do n't it wo n't be my fault , " answer with decision . " i shall work with my whole heart and soul . " " a good day 's work , , " the african merchant be remark at that very moment in . " the firm be pinch again for work expense . this will help ; " and he throw a little slip of green paper across the table to his son . " it will help us for a time , " say , gloomily , glance at the figure . " it be fortunate that i be able to put you on his track . it be only a drop in the ocean , however . unless this diamond spec . come off , nothing can save us . " " but it shall come off , " his father answer resolutely . he have succeed in obtain an agent who appear to be almost as well fit for the post as the recalcitrant major . this worthy have start off already for , where the scene of his operation be to lie . " i hope so , " say . " we have neglect no precaution . should be at by this time . i see that he have a bag of rough stone with him which would do well enough for his purpose . " " we have your money ready , too . i can rely upon rather over thirty thousand pound . our credit be good for that , but i do not wish to push it too far for fear of set tongue wag . " " i be think of start shortly in the mail boat cyprian , " say . " i should be at the diamond field in little more than a month . i dare say wo n't show any sign for some time yet , but i may as well be there as here . it will give me a little while to find my way about . you see , if the tidings and i be to come almost simultaneously , it might arouse suspicion . in the meantime , no one know our little game . " " except your friend . " a dark shadow pass over 's handsome face , and his cruel lip tighten in a way which bode little good to the old soldier should he ever lie at his mercy . it be a proud day for the student when he first enter the counting-house of the african firm and realize that he be one of the govern power in that busy establishment . 's mind be an intensely practical one , and although he have find the study of science an irksome matter , he be able to throw himself into business with uncommon energy and devotion . the clerk soon find that the sunburnt , athletic-looking young man intend to be anything but a sleeping partner , and both they and old respect him accordingly . the latter have at first be incline to resent the new arrangement as far as his gentle nature could resent anything . hitherto he have be the monarch of the counting-house in the absence of the , but now a high desk have be erect in a more central portion of the room , and this be for the accommodation of the new comer . , after his thirty year of service , feel this usurpation of his right very keenly ; but there be such a simple kindness about the invader , and he be so grateful for any assistance in his new duty , that the old clerk 's resentment soon melt away . a little incident occur which strengthen this kindly feeling . it chance that some few day after 's first appearance in the office several of the clerk , who have not yet quite gauge what manner of man this young gentleman might be , take advantage of the absence of the to take a rise out of the manager . one of them , a great rawboned scotchman , name , after one or two minor exhibition of wit conclude by drop a heavy ruler over the partition of the old man 's desk in such a way that it crash down upon his head as he sit stoop over his writing . , who have be watch the proceeding with a baleful eye , spring off his stool and make across the office at the offender . seem incline for a moment to brazen it out , but there be a dangerous sling about 's shoulder and a flush of honest indignation upon his face . " i do n't mean to hurt him , " say the scotchman . " do n't hit him , sir ! " cry the little manager . " beg his pardon , " say between his tooth . stammer out some lame apology , and the matter be end . it reveal the new partner , however , in an entirely novel light to the inmate of the counting-house . that under such circumstance a complaint should be carry to the senior be only natural , but that the junior should actually take the matter into his own hand and execute lynch law then and there be altogether a new phenomenon . from that day acquire a great ascendancy in the office , and become his devoted slave . this friendship with the old clerk prove to be very useful , for by mean of his shrewd hint and patient teach the new comer gain a grasp of the business which he could not have attain by any other method . call him into the office one day and congratulate him upon the progress which he be make . " my dear young man , " he say to him in his patriarchal way , " i be delight to hear of the way in which you identify yourself with the interest of the firm . if at first you find work allot to you which may appear to you to be rather menial , you must understand that that be simply due to our desire that you should master the whole business from its very foundation . " " there be nothing i desire good , " say . " in addition to the routine of office work , and the superintendence of the clerk , i should wish you to have a thorough grasp of all the detail of the shipping , and of the loading and unload of our vessel , as well as of the storage of good when land . when any of our ship be in , i should wish you to go down to the dock and to overlook everything which be do . " bow and congratulate himself inwardly upon these new duty , which promise to be interesting . " as you grow old , " say the senior partner , " you will find it of inestimable value that you have have practical experience of what your subordinate have to do . my whole life have teach me that . when you be in doubt upon any subject you can ask for assistance and advice . he be a young man whom you might well take as an example , for he have great business capacity . when he have go to you can come to me if there be anything which you do not understand . " appear to be so kindly and benevolent during this and other interview , that 's heart warm towards him , and he come to the conclusion that his father have judge the old merchant harshly . more than once , so impress be he by his kindness , that he be on the point of disclose to him his engagement to his ward , but on each occasion there arise within him a lively recollection of 's frightened face when he have suggest such a course , and he feel that without her consent he have no right to divulge the secret . if the elder improve upon acquaintance it be exactly the reverse with his son . the dislike with which have originally regard him deepen as he come in close contact , and appear to be reciprocate by the other , so that they hold but little intercourse together . have take into his own charge all the financial part of the concern , and guard it the more jealously when he realize that the new partner be so much less simple than he have expect . thus have no opportunity of ascertain for himself how the affair of the firm stand , but believe implicitly , as do , that every outlay be bring in a large and remunerative return . very much astonish would both of them have be have they realize that the work expense be at present be pay entirely from their own capital until such time as the plot should ripen which be to restore the fortune of the african company . in one respect be immeasurably the gainer by his connection with the firm , for without that it be difficult to say how he could have find opportunity for break through the barrier which separate him from . the surveillance of the merchant have become strict of late , and all invitation from or other friend who pity the loneliness of the girl be repulse by with the curt intimation that his ward 's health be not such as to justify him in allow her to incur any risk of catch a chill . she be practically a prisoner in the great stone cage in , and even on her walk a warder in the shape of a footman be , as we have see , tell off to guard her . whatever 's reason may have be , he have evidently come to the conclusion that it be of the high importance that she should be keep seclude . as it be , , thank to his position as one of the firm , be able occasionally , in spite of every precaution to penetrate through the old man 's defensive work . if a question of importance arise at during the absence of the senior partner , what more natural than that should volunteer to walk round to in order to acquaint him with the fact . and if it happen that the gentleman be not to be find there , how very natural that the young man should wait half an hour for him , and that should take the opportunity of a chat with an old friend ? precious , precious interview those , the more so for their rarity . they brighten the dull routine of 's weary life and send back to the office full of spirit and hope . the day be at hand when the memory of them be to shine out like little rift of light in the dark cloud of existence . and now the time be come when it be to be decide whether , by a last bold stroke , the credit of the of be to be save , or whether the attempt be to plunge them into deeper and more hopeless ruin . an unscrupulous agent name have , as already indicate , be despatch to well prime with instruction as to what to do and how to do it . he have be in the employ of an english corn merchant at , and have some knowledge of the russian language which would be invaluable to him in his undertaking . in the character of an english gentleman of scientific taste he be to establish himself in some convenient village among the . there he be to remain some little time , so as to arouse confidence in the people before make his pretend discovery . he be then to carry his rough diamond to , as the near large town , and to exhibit them there , back up his assertion by the evidence of villager who have see him dig them up . the know that that alone would be sufficient when telegraph to to produce a panic in the sensitive diamond market . before any systematic inquiry could be make , would have disappear , and their little speculation would have come off . after that the sooner the people realize that it be a hoax the good for the conspirator . in any case , there seem to be no possibility that the origin of the rumour could be trace . meanwhile , have secure his passage in the mail steamer . on the night that he leave he sit up late in the library at talk over the matter for the last time with his father . the old man be pale and nervous . the one weak point in his character be his affection for his son , an affection which he strive to hide under an austere manner , but which be none the less genuine . he have never before part with him for any length of time , and he feel the wrench keenly . as to , he be flush and excite at the thought of the new scene which lay before him and the daring speculation in which he be about to embark . he fling himself into a chair and stretch his thick , muscular limb out in front of him . " i know as much about stone , " he say exultantly , " as any man in . i be price a bag of rough one at 's , and he be reckon a good judge . he say that no expert could have do it well . bless you ! pure or splint , or crack , or off colour , or spot , or twin stone , i be up to them all . i be n't a pound out in the market value of any one of them . " " you deserve great credit for your quickness and perseverance , " reply his father . " your knowledge will be invaluable to you when you be at the field . be careful of yourself when you be there , my son , if only for my sake . there be rough fellow at such place , and you must give them soft word . i know that your temper be quick , but remember those wise word , ' he that his spirit be good than he that a city . ' " " never fear for me , dad , " say , with a sinister smile , point to a small leather case which lie among his thing . " that be the good six-shooter i could get for money . i have take a tip , you see , from our good friend , the major , and have six answer for any one that want to argue with me . if i have have that the other day he would n't have bounce me so easily . " " , but , , " his father say , in great agitation , " you will promise to be careful and to avoid quarrel and bloodshed . it be against the great law , the new commandment . " " i wo n't get into any row if i can help it , " his son answer . " that be not my game . " " but if you think that there be no mistake , if your opponent be undoubtedly about to proceed to extremity , shoot him down at once , my dear lad , before he have time to draw . i have hear those who have be out there say that in such case everything depend upon get the first shot . i be anxious about you , and shall not be easy until i see you again . " " bless if he have n't tear in his eye ! " exclaim to himself , much astonish at this unprecedented occurrence . " when do you go ? " his father ask . " my train leave in an hour or so . i reach the steamer at about three in the morning , and she start with the full tide at six . " " look after your health , " the old man continue . " do n't get your foot wet , and wear flannel next your skin . do n't forget your religious duty either . it have a good effect upon those among whom you do business . " spring from his chair with an exclamation of disgust and begin to pace up and down . " i wish to you would drop that sort of gammon when we be alone , " he say irritably . " my dear boy , " say the father , with a mild look of surprise upon his face , " you seem to be under a misapprehension in this matter . you appear to consider that we be embark upon some unjustifiable undertaking . this be not so . what we be do be simply a small commercial finesse . it be a recognize maxim of trade to endeavour to depreciate the price of whatever you want to buy , and to raise it again when the time come for selling . " " it be steer very close to the law , " his son retort . " no speculate , now , while i be away ; whatever come in must go towards get us out of this scrape , not to plunge us deeper in the mire . " " i shall not expend an unnecessary penny . " " well , then , good-bye . " say the young man , rise up and hold out his hand . " keep your eye on and do n't trust him . " " good-bye , my son , bless you ! " the old merchant be honestly move , and his voice quiver as he speak . he stand motionless for a minute or so until the heavy door slam , and then he throw open the window and gaze sorrowfully down the street at the disappear cab . his whole attitude express such dejection that his ward , who have just enter the room , feel more draw towards him than she have ever do before . slip up to him she place her warm tender hand upon his sympathetically . " he will soon be back , dear , " she say . " you must not be uneasy about him . " as she stand beside him in her white dress , with a single red ribbon round her neck and a band of the same colour round her waist , she be as fair a specimen of english as could have be find in all . the merchant 's feature soften as he look down at her fresh young face , and he put out his hand as though to caress her , but some unpleasant thought must have cross his mind , for he assume suddenly a dark look and turn away from her without a word . more than once that night she recall that strange spasmodic expression of something akin to horror which have pass over her guardian 's feature as he gaze at her . the anxious father have not very long to wait before he hear tidings of his son . upon the first of the great vessel weigh her anchor in the , and steam past the into the . on the 5th she be report from , and the merchant receive telegram both from the agent of the firm and from his son . then there be a long interval of silence , for the telegraph do not extend to the at that time , but , at last on the 8th of , a letter announce 's safe arrival . he write again from , which be the railway terminus , and finally there come a long epistle from , the capital of the mining district , in which the young man describe his eight hundred mile drive up country and all the adventure which overtake him on the way . " this place , , " he say in his letter , " have grow into a fair-sized town , though a few year ago it be just a camp . now there be church , bank , and a club in it . there be a sprinkling of well-dressed people in the street , but the majority be chap from the diggings , with slouch hat and coloured shirt , rough fellow to look at , though quiet enough as a rule . of course , there be black everywhere , of all shade , from pure jet up to the light yellow . some of these nigger have money , and be quite independent . you would be surprise at their impertinence . i kick one of them in the hotel yesterday , and he ask me what the devil i be do , so i knock the insolent scoundrel down . he say that he will sue me , but i can believe that the law be so servile as to bolster up a black man against a white one . " be the capital of the dry diggings , it be not there that all the actual mining be do . it go on briskly in a lot of little camp , which be dot along the vaal river for fifty or sixty mile . the stone be generally buy by licensed agent immediately after they have be find , and be pay for by cheque on bank in . i have , therefore , transfer our money to the here , and have take my licence . i start for , , and other of the mining centre to see for myself how business be do and to make friend with the miner , so as to get myself know . as soon as the news come i shall buy in all that offer . keep your eye on that fellow , and let him know nothing of what be go on . " he write again about a fortnight afterwards , and his letter , as it cross the , pass the outward mail , which bear the news of the wonderful diamond find make by an english geologist among the . " i be now on a tour among the camp , " he say . " i have work right through from to , , 's , 's , 's , , and . i push on to 's and 's . i be well receive wherever i go , except by the dealer , who be mostly german jew . they hear that i be a capitalist , and fear that i may send up the price . they little know ! i buy stone all the way along , but not very valuable one , for we must husband our resource . " the process of mining be very simple . the man dig pit in loose gravel lie along the bank of the river , and it be in these pit that the diamond be find . the black man , or ' boy , ' as they call them , do all the work , and ' baa , ' or master , superintend . everything that turn up belong to the ' baa , ' but the boy have a fix rate of wage , which never vary , whether the work be pay or not . i be stand at watch one of the gang work when the white chap give a shout , and dive his hand into a heap of stuff he have just turn over , pull out a dirty look little lump about the size of a marble . at his shout all the other fellow from every claim within hear gather round , until there be quite a crowd . " ' it be a fine stone , ' say the man that turn it up . " ' carat if it be one , ' cry another , weigh it in the palm of his hand . " i have my scale with me , so i offer to weigh it . it be and a half carat . then they wash it and examine it . there be a lot of whisper among them and then the one who have find it come forward . " ' you deal , do n't you , ? ' he say . " ' now and then , ' i answer , ' but i be not very keen about it . i come out here more for pleasure than business . " ' well , ' he say , ' you may go far before you see a fine stone than this . what will you bid for it ? ' " i look at it . ' it be , ' i say . " ' it be white , ' say he and one or two of his chum . " ' , ' i say , ' it be not white . there be two shade of yellow in it . it be worth little or nothing . ' " ' why , if it be yellow it make it all the more valuable , ' say a big fellow with a black beard and corduroy trouser . ' a yellow stone be as good as a white . ' " ' yes , ' i answer , ' a pure yellow stone be . but this be neither one nor the other . it be off-colour , and you know that as well as ' " ' wo n't you bid for it , then ? ' say one of them . " ' i will bid seventy pound , ' i say , ' but not a penny more . ' " you should have hear the howl they all set up . ' it be worth five hundred , ' the fellow cry . " ' all right , ' i say , ' keep it and sell it for that ; good day , ' and i go off . the stone be send after me that evening with a request for my cheque , and i sell it for a hundred two day afterwards . [ 1 ] you see old 's training have come in very handy . i just tell you this little anecdote to let you see that though i be new in the work i be not to be do . nothing in the paper here from . i be ready , come when it may . what would you do if there should be any hitch and the affair do not come off ? would you cut and run , or would you stand by your colour and pay a shilling or so in the pound ? the more i think of it the more i curse your insanity in get us into such a mess . good-bye . " " he be right . it be insanity , " say the old merchant lean his head upon his hand . " it seem unkind of the lad to say so when he be so far away , but he be always plain and blunt . ' if the affair do not come must have some doubt about the matter , else he would not even suppose such a thing . know what i should do then . there be other way . " he pass his hand over his eye as he speak , as though to shut out some ugly vision . such a wan , strange expression play over his grim feature that he be hardly to be recognize as the revere elder of the trinitarian or the esteem man of business of . he be lose in thought for some little time , and then , rise , he touch the bell upon the table . trot in upon the signal so rapidly and noiselessly , that he might have be one of those convenient genii in the eastern fable , only that the little clerk 's appearance , from the tip of his finger to the toe of his seedy boot , be so hopelessly prosaic that it be impossible to picture him as anything but what he be . " ah , ! " the merchant begin , " be in the office ? " " yes , sir . " " that be all right . he seem to be very regular in his attendance . " " very , sir . " " and seem to take to the business very well . " " uncommonly quick , sir , to be sure , " say the head clerk . " what with work among the ship , and work in the office , he be at it late and early . " " that be very right , " say the old man , play with the letter weight . " application in youth , , lead to leisure in old age . be the of unload ? " " have be down to her this morning , sir . they be get the thing out fast . he want to call attention to the state of the vessel , . he say that it be make water even in dock , and that some of the hand say that they wo n't go back in her . " " tut ! tut ! " say peevishly . " what be the government inspector for ? there be no use pay them if we be to inspect ourselves . if they insist upon any alteration they shall be make . " " they be there , sir , at the same time as , " say , diffidently . " well , what then ? " ask his employer . " he say , sir , that the inspector go down to the cabin and have some champagne with . they then profess themselves to be very well satisfy with the state of the vessel and come away . " " there you be ! " the senior partner cry triumphantly . " of course these man can see at a glance how thing stand , and if thing have really be wrong they would have call attention to it . let us have no more of these false alarm . you must say a few word on the point to , as come from yourself , not from me . tell him to be more careful before he jump to conclusion . " " i will , sir . " " and bring me ledger no. @card@ . " stretch up his arm and take down a fat little ledger from a high shelf , which he lay respectfully before his employer . then , see that he be no longer want , he withdraw . no. @card@ be secure by a clasp and latter a patent one which defy all tamperer . take a small key from his pocket and open it with a quick snap . a precious volume this , for it be the merchant 's private book , which alone contain a true record of the financial state of the firm , all other be make merely for show . without it he would have be unable to keep his son in the dark for so many month until bitter necessity at last compel him to show his hand . he turn the page over slowly and sadly . here be a record of the sum sink in the , which be to have pay @card@ per cent . , and which fall to piece in the second month of its existence . here be the money advance to , , & , on the strength of security which prove to be the flimsy of insecurity when test . further on be the account of the dealing of the firm with the , the treasurer of which have levant with the great part of the capital . here , too , be a memorandum of the sum sink upon the and the , whose unfortunate collision have well-nigh prove the death blow of the firm . it be melancholy reading , and perhaps the last page be the most melancholy of all . on it the old man have draw up in a condensed form an exact account of the present condition of the firm 's finance . here it be exactly word for word as he have write it down himself . & @card@ debit . credit . incur previous to | , in , hold disclosure to @card@ | this money with which @card@ pound raise at six | to speculate . @card@ month , and @card@ pound | balance in bank , at nine month @card@ | include what remain interest on say money at | of 's premium . @card@ 5 per cent . @card@ | profit on the cargo of work expense of | of , now firm during the next six | in port . @card@ month , include cost of | profit on the cargo ship , at @card@ pound per | of week @card@ | and , calculate private expense at | at the same rate . @card@ , say @card@ | deficit @card@ expense of | in , and of my dear | son in , say @card@ | @card@ | @card@ | @card@ | all this money must be find within possibility of the sink nine month at the outside . a ship must not be would bring in @card@ to @card@ pound . " come , it be not so very bad after all , " the merchant mutter , after he have go over these figure very slowly and carefully . he lean back in his chair and look up at the ceiling with a much more cheerful expression upon his face . " at the bad it be less than thirty thousand pound . why , many firm would think little of it . the fact be , that i have so long be accustom to big balance on the right side that it seem to be a very dreadful thing now that it lie the other way . a dozen thing may happen to set all right . i must not forget , however , " he continue , with a dark look , " that i have dip into my credit so freely that i could not borrow any more without exciting suspicion and have the whole swarm down on us . after all , our hope lie in the diamond . can fail . he must succeed . who can prevent him ? " " , " cry the sharp , creaky voice of as if in answer to the question , and the little clerk , who have knock once or twice unnoticed , open the door and usher in the old . [ 1 ] it may be well to remark , that this and succeed incident occur in the old colony day , before the diamond legislation be as strict as it have since become . have frequently hear his son speak of the major in the day when they have be intimate , and have always attribute some of the young man be more obvious vice to the effect of this ungodly companionship . he have also hear from a mangle version of the interview and quarrel in the private room of 's . hence , as may be imagine , his feeling towards his visitor be far from friendly , and he greet him as he enter with the cold of possible bow . the major , however , be by no mean abash by this chilling reception , but stump forward with beaming face and his pudgy hand outstretch , so that the other have no alternative but to shake it , which he do very gingerly and reluctantly . " and how be ? " say the major , step back a pace or two , and inspect the merchant as though he be examine his point with the intention of purchase him . " many be the time i have hear talk of . it be a real treat to see . how be ? " pounce upon the other 's unresponsive hand , he wring it again with effusion . " i be indebted to for fairly good health , sir , " answer coldly . " may i request you to take a seat ? " " that be what me friend be try to do for twelve year , and ruin himself over it in the . he put up at in the conservative interest , and the a vote do he get , except one , and that be a blind man who sign the wrong paper be mistake , ! ! " the major laugh boisterously at his own anecdote , and mop his forehead with his handkerchief . the two man , as they stand opposite each other , be a strange contrast , the one tall , grave , white , and emotionless , the other noisy and pompous , with protuberant military chest and rubicund feature . they have one common characteristic , however . from under the shaggy eyebrow of the merchant and the sparse light-coloured lash of the major there come the same keen , restless , shift glance . both be crafty , and each be keenly on his guard against the other . " i have hear of you from my son , " the merchant say , motion his visitor to a chair . " you be , i believe , in the habit of meet together for the purpose of play card , billiard , and other such game , which i by no mean countenance myself , but to which my son be unhappily somewhat addict . " " you do n't play yourself , " say the major , in a sympathetic voice . " , sir , it be never too late to begin , and many a man have put in a very comfortable old age on billiard and whist . now , if feel incline to make a start , i will give point in a hundred for a . " " thank you , " say the merchant drily . " it be not one of my ambition . be this challenge the business upon which you come ? " the old soldier laugh until his merriment startle the clerk in the counting-house . " be ! " he say , in a wheezy voice , " think i come five mile to do that ? no , sir , i want to talk to you about your son . " " my son ! " " yes , your son . he be a smart smart as quick as they make ' em . he may be a trifle coarse at time , but that be the spirit of the age , me dear sir . me friend , of the , say that delicacy go out of fashion with hair powder and beauty patch . he be a satirical fellow be . do n't know him , ? " " no , sir , i do n't , " say angrily ; " nor have i any desire to make his acquaintance . let us proceed to business for my time be valuable . " the major look at him with an amiable smile . " that quick temper run in the family , " he say . " i have notice it in your son . as i say before , he be a smart lad ; but me friend , he be shockingly rash and extremely . musk speak to him about it . " " what do you mean sir ? " ask the merchant , white with anger . " have you come to insult him in his absence ? " " absence ? " say the soldier , still smile blandly over his stock . " that be the very point i want to get at . he be away in the diamond field . a wonderful , conduct with remarkable energy , but also with remarkable rashness , , , inexcusable rashness . " take up his heavy ebony ruler and play with it nervously . he have an overpowering desire to hurl it at the head of his companion . " what would say , now , " the veteran continue , cross one leg over the other and argue the matter out in a confidential -- " what would you say if a young man come to you , and , on the assumption that you be a dishonest , appeal to you to help him in a very shady sort of a scheme ? it would argue indiscretion on his part , would it not ? " the merchant sit still , but grow white and white . " and if on the top of that he give you all the detail of his , without even wait to see if you favour it or not , he would be more than , would n't he ? your own good , me dear sir , will tell you that he would be culpably so , ! " " well , sir ? " say the old man , in a hoarse voice . " well , " continue the major , " i have no doubt that your son tell you of the interesting little conversation that we have together . he be good enough to promise that if i go to and to discover a fictitious mine , i should be liberally reward by the firm . i be under the necessity of point out to him that certain principle on which me the major inflate his which me family be accustom to act would me from take advantage of his offer . he then , i be sorry to say , lose his temper , and some word pass between us , the result of which be that we part so rapidly that , be ! i have hardly time to make him realize how great an indiscretion he have commit . " the merchant still sit perfectly still , tap the table with his black ebony ruler . " of course , hear a of the plan , " continue the major , " me curiosity be so arouse that i could not help follow the detail with . i see the who depart for -- , i believe , be his name . ! i know a chap of that name in the who use to drink raw brandy and cayenne pepper before breakfast every morning . do ? of course you could n't . what be i talk of at all at all ? " stare gloomily at his visitor . the latter take a pinch of snuff from a tortoise-shell box , and flick away a few wander grain which settle upon the front of his coat . " yes , " he go on , i see off to . then i see your son start for . he be an lad , and sure to do well there . non mutant , as we use to say at . he will always come to the front , wherever he be , as long as he avoid little slip like this one we be of . about the same time i hear that & , have raise money to the of five and thirty thousand pound . that be go to , too , i presume . it be a lot o ' money to in such a game , and it might be safe if you be the only people that know about it , but whin there be -- " " other ? " " why , me , of course , " say the major . " i know about it , and more be token i be not in the swim with you . sure , i could go this very evening to the diamond merchant about town and give them a tip about the come fall in price that would rather astonish ' em . " " look here , , " cry the merchant , in a voice which quiver with suppress passion , " you have come into possession of an important commercial secret . why beat about the bush any longer ? what be the object of your visit ? what be it that you want ? " " there now ! " the major say , address himself and smile more amicably than ever . " that be business . , there be where you commercial man have the pull . you go straight to the point and stick there . ah , when i look at , i ca n't help think of your son . the same intelligent eye , the same cheery expression , the same devil-may-care manner and dry -- " " my question , will you ? " the merchant interrupt savagely . " and the same hasty , " continue the major imperturbably . " i have forget , me dear sir , what it be you ask me . " " what be it you want ? " " ah , yes , of course . what be it i want ? " the old soldier say meditatively . " some would say more , some less . some would want half , but that be overdo it . how do a thousand pound you ? yes , i think we may put it at a thousand pound . " " you want a thousand pound ? " " , i have be want it all me life . the difference be that i be go to git it now . " " and for what ? " " sure , for neutrality . we be all in it now , and there be a fair division of labour . you plan , your son work , i hold me tongue . you make your ten of thousand , i make my modest little thousand . we all git pay for our . " " and suppose i refuse ? " " ah ! but you could n't , " the major say suavely . " , sir , i have n't know long , but i have far too high an opinion of to suppose could do anything so foolish . if you refuse , your speculation be throw away . there be no help for it . , it would be painful for me to have to blow the gaff ; but you know the old saying , that ' charity begin at home . ' you must sell your knowledge at the good market . " think intently for a minute or two , with his great eyebrow draw down over his little restless eye . " you say to my son , " he remark at last , " that you be too honourable to embark in our undertaking . do you consider it honourable to make use of knowledge gain in confidence for the purpose of extort money ? " " me dear sir , " answer the major , hold up his hand deprecatingly , " you put me in the painful position of have to explain in plain word . if i see a man about to do a murther , i should think nothing of murther him . if i see a pickpocket at work , i will pick his pocket , and think it good fun to do it . now , this little business of yours -- well , we will say unusual , and if what i do seem a little unusual too , it be to be excuse . ca n't throw stone at every one , me boy , and then be surprise when some one throw one at you . you bite the diamond holder , see , and i take a little nibble at you . it be all fair enough . " the merchant reflect again for some moment . " suppose we agree to purchase your silence at this price , " he say , " what guarantee have we that you will not come and extort more money , or that you may not betray our secret after all ? " " the honour of a soldier and a , " answer the major , rise and tap his chest with two finger of his right hand . a slight sneer play over 's pale face , but he make no remark . " we be in your power , " he say , and have no resource but to submit to your term . you say five hundred pound ? " " a thousand , " the major answer cheerfully . " it be a great sum of money . " " deuce of a lot ! " say the veteran cordially . " well , you shall have it . i will communicate with you . " rise as if to terminate the interview . the major make no remark , but he show his white tooth again , and tap 's cheque-book with the silver head of his . " what ! now ? " " yes , now . " the two look at each other for a moment and the merchant sit down again and scribble out a cheque , which he toss to his companion . the latter look it over carefully , take a fat little pocket-book from the depth of his breast pocket , and have place the precious slip of paper in it , laboriously push it back into its receptacle . then he very slowly and methodically pick up his jaunty hat and shine kid glove , and with a cheery nod to his companion , who answer it with a scowl , he swagger off into the counting-house . there he shake hand with , whom he have know for some month , and have make three successive to stand immediately an unlimited quantity of champagne , a second to play him five hundred up for anything he would name , and a third to lay a tenner for him at 7 to 4 on for the of which offer be decline with bow himself out , leave a vague memory of smile , shirt collar , and gaiter in the mind of the awe-struck clerk . whatever an impartial judge might think of the means whereby have successfully screw a thousand pound out of the firm of , it be quite certain that that gentleman 's seasoned conscience do not reproach him in the least degree . on the contrary , his whole being seem saturate and impregnate with the wild hilarity and delight . twice in less than a hundred yard , he be compel to stop and lean upon his cane owe to the breathlessness which supervene upon his attempt to smother the delighted chuckle which come surge up from the inmost recess of his capacious frame . at the second halt he wriggle his hand inside his coat , and after as many contortion as though he be about to shed that garment as a snake do its skin , he produce once more the little fat pocket-book . from it he extract the cheque and look it over lovingly . then he hail a pass hansom . " drive to the and , " he say . it have strike him that since the firm be in a shaky state he have well draw the money as soon as possible . in the bank a cashier take the cheque and stare at it somewhat longer than the occasion seem to demand . it be but a few minute , yet it appear a very long time to the major . " how will you have it ? " he ask at last , in a mournful voice . it tend to make a man cynical when he spend his day in handle untold rich while his wife and six child be struggle to make both end meet at home . " a in gold and the rest in note , " say the major , with a sigh of relief . the cashier count and hand over a thick packet of crisp rustle paper and a little pile of shine sovereign . the major stow away the first in the pocket-book and the latter in his trouser pocket . then he swagger out with a great increase of pomposity and importance , and order his cabman to drive to . be sit in the major 's campaigning chair , smoke his pipe and gaze dreamily at the long blue wreath . time have be bad with the comrade of late , as the 's seedy appearance sufficiently testify . his friend in have cease to forward his small remittance , and 's office , in which he have be employ , have give him notice that for a time they could dispense with his service . he have be spend the whole afternoon in peruse the long list of " " in the , and his forefinger show the perseverance with which he have be answer every advertisement that could possibly apply to him . a pile of address envelope lie upon the table , and it be only the uncertainty of his finance and the fact that the humble penny stamp mount into shilling when frequently employ , that prevent him from increase the number of his application . he look up and utter a word of guttural greeting as his companion come stride in . " get out of this , " the major say abruptly . " get away into the bedroom . " " ! be it then ? " cry the astonish teuton . " out with you ! i want this room to . " shrug his shoulder and lumber off like a good-natured plantigrade , close the door behind him . when his companion have disappear the major proceed to lay out all his note upon the table , overlap each other , but still so arrange that every separate one be visible . he then build in the centre ten little golden column in a circle , each consist of ten sovereign , until the whole present the appearance of a metallic upon a plain of bank note . this do , he cock his head on one side , like a fat and very ruddy turkey , and contemplate his little arrangement with much pride and satisfaction . solitary delight soon become wearisome , however , so the veteran summon his companion . the teuton be so dumbfound by this display of wealth , that he be bereave for a time of all faculty of speech , and could only stare open-mouthed at the table . at last he extend a and thumb and rub a five pound note between them , as though to convince himself of its reality , after which he begin to gyrate round the table in a sort of war dance , never take his eye from the heap of influence in front of him . " ! " he exclaim , " ! ! be fur ! ! " und a thousand other cacophonous expression of satisfaction and amazement . when the old soldier have sufficiently enjoy the lively emotion which show itself on every feature of the 's countenance , he pick up the note and lock them in his desk together with half the gold . the other fifty pound he return into his pocket . " come on ! " he say to his companion abruptly . " come ? vat be it ? " " come on ! " roar the major irascibly . " what want to stand ask question for ? put on your hat and come . " the major have retain the cab at the door , and the two jump into it . " drive to 's , " he say to the driver . when they arrive at that aristocratic and expensive establishment , the soldier order the good dinner for two that money could procure . " have it in two hour sharp , " he say to the manager . " none of your half-and-half wine , mind ! we want the rale thing , and , be ! we can tell the difference ! " have leave the manager much impress , the two friend set out for a ready-made clothing establishment . " i wo n't come in , " the major say , slip ten sovereign into 's hand . " just you go in and till them want the good suit o ' clothes they can give you . they have a good there , i know . " " in ! " cry the amaze german . " but , my dear , you can in the street . come in mit me . " " no , i will wait , " the old soldier answer . " they might think i be pay for the clothes if i come in . " " well , but so -- " " , would ? " roar the major , raise his cane , and disappear precipitately into the shop . when he emerge once more at the end of twenty minute , he be attire in an elegant and close-fitting suit of heather tweed . the pair then make successive visit to a , a hatter , and a draper , with the result that develop patent leather boot , a jaunty brown hat , and a pair of light yellow glove . by the end of their walk there seem nothing leave of the original except a tawny beard , and an expression of hopeless and overpowering astonishment . have effect this transformation , the friend retrace their step to 's and do full justice to the spread await them , after which the old soldier win the heart of the establishment by bestow largess upon every one who come in his way . as to the further adventure of these two , it would be as well perhaps to draw a veil over them . suffice it that , about two in the morning , the worthy be awaken by a stentorian voice in the street below demand to know " be ? " -- somewhat vexed question which the owner of the say voice be propound to the solitary lamp-post of . on descend the landlady discover that the author of this disturbance be a fashionably dress gentleman , who , upon close inspection , prove to her great surprise to be none other than the usually demure part proprietor of her fourth floor . as to the major , he walk in quietly the next day about twelve o'clock , look as trim and neat as ever , but minus the balance of the fifty pound , nor do he think fit ever to make any allusion to this some what heavy deficit . have naturally reckon that the longer he withhold this trump card of his the great would be its effect when play . an obstacle appear at the last moment produce more consternation than when a scheme be still in its infancy . it prove , however , that he have only just levy his blackmail in time , for within a couple of day of his interview with the head of the firm news arrive of the great discovery of diamond among the . the first intimation be receive through the in the form of the follow telegram : -- - " , @card@ . -- be report from that an important discovery of diamond field have be make amongst the spur of the , at a point not very far from that city . they be say to have be find by an english geologist , who have exhibit many magnificent gem in proof of his assertion . these stone have be examine at , and be pronounce to be equal , if not superior , in quality to any find elsewhere . a company have be already form for the purpose of purchase the land and work the mine . " some day afterwards there come a 's telegram give full detail . " with regard to the diamond field near , " it say , " there be every reason to believe that they be of great , and possibly unsurpassed , wealth . there be no question now as to their authenticity , since their discoverer prove to be an english gentleman of high character , and his story be corroborate by villager from this district who have dug up stone for themselves . the government contemplate buy out the company and take over the mine , which might be profitably work by the force labour of political prisoner on a system similar to that adopt in the salt mine of . the discovery be universally regard as one which have materially increase the internal resource of the country , and there be some talk of the presentation of a substantial testimonial to the energetic and scientific traveller to whom it be due . " within a week or ten day of the receipt of these telegram in there come letter from the russian correspondent of the various journal give full detail upon a subject of so much general interest . the direct attention to the matter in a leader . " it appear , " remark the great paper , " that a most important addition have be make to the mineral wealth of the russian empire . the silver mine of and the petroleum well of the be to be outrival by the new diamond field of the . for untold thousand of year these precious fragment of crystallize carbon have be lie unheeded among the gloomy gorge wait for the hand of man to pick them out . it have fall to the lot of one of our countryman to point out to the russian nation the great wealth which lie untouched and unsuspected in the heart of their realm . the story be a romantic one . it appear that a , a wealthy english gentleman of good extraction , have , in the course of his travel in , continue his journey as far as the great mountain barrier which separate from . being fond of sport , he be wander in search of game down one of the valley , when his attention be attract by the thick gravel , which be pile up along the track of a dried-up . the appearance and situation of this gravel remind him forcibly of the south african diamond field , and so strong be the impression that he at once lay down his gun and proceed to rake the gravel over and to examine it . his search be reward by the discovery of several stone , which he convey home with him , and which prove , after be clean , to be gem of the first water . elate at this success , he return to the spot next day with a spade , and succeed in obtain many other specimen , and in convince himself that the deposit stretch up and down for a long distance on both side of the torrent . have satisfy himself upon this point , our compatriot make his way to , where he exhibit his prise to several of the rich merchant , and proceed to form a company for the working of the new field . he be so successful in this that the share be already far above par , and our correspondent write that there have be a rush of capitalist , all eager to invest their money in so promise a venture . it be expect that within a few month the necessary plant will have be erect and the concern be in work order . " the treat the matter from a jocose and historical point of view . " it have long be a puzzle to antiquary and geologist , " it remark , " as to where those jewel which bring from the be originally obtain . there have be much speculation , too , regard the source of those less apocryphal gem which sparkle in the regalia of the indian monarch and adorn the palace of and . as a nation we have a personal interest in the question , since the large and most magnificent of these stone be now in the possession of our most gracious . have throw a light upon this obscure subject . accord to this gentleman 's research these treasure be unearth amidst that dark and gloomy range of mountain which have interpose between a nascent civilization and a continent of barbarian . nor be 's opinion found upon theory alone . he lend point to his argument by present to the greedy eye of the merchant of a bag fill with valuable diamond , each and every one of which he profess to have discover in these barren inhospitable valley . this english tourist , descend like some good spirit among these dreamy muscovite , point out to them the untold wealth which have lie for so many century at their foot , and with the characteristic energy of his race show them at the same time how to turn the discovery to commercial advantage . if the deposit prove to be as extensive as be suppose , it be possible that our descendant may wear cut diamond in their eye-glass , should such accessory be necessary , and marvel at the ignorance of those primitive day when a metamorphose piece of coal be regard as the most valuable product of nature . " the ordinary british paterfamilias , glance over his morning paper , bestow probably but few pass thought on the incident , but among business man and in the its significance be at once understand . not only do it create the deep consternation amongst all who be connect with the diamond industry , but it react upon every other branch of south african commerce . it be the chief subject of conversation upon the , and many be the surmise as to what the effect of the news would be at the field . , the father of the diamond industry , be stand discuss the question , when a little jew , name , come bustle up to him . he be much excite , for he speculate in stone , and have just be buy in for a rise . " , " he cry , " you be the man i want to see . , be to become of us all ? be to become of diamond trade one can pick them up like cockle on the sea shore ? " " we must wait for detail , " the great financier say phlegmatically . his fortune be so enormous that it matter little to him whether the report be true or false . " detail ! it be nothing but detail , " cry the little jew . " the paper be full of them . i to the that that have his neck in the before he get up to any such game . vat business have he to go examine gravel and peep about in such place as them . nobody that be any good would ever go to the at all . " " it wo n't hurt you , " say ; " you will simply have to pay less for your stone and sell them cheap after they be cut . it wo n't make much difference in the long run . " " n't it , by ! why , man , i have get over a hundred on my hand now . vat be i go to do ' em . " " ah , that be a bad job . you must make up your mind to lose on them . " " n't you buy them yourself , ? " ask the hebrew , in an insinuate voice . " maybe this here story will all turn out wrong . me bob i give three thousand for the lot , and you shall have them for two . let have have a deal , my tear , do ? " " no more for me , thank you , " say with decision . " as to the story be wrong , i have telegraph to , and they have send on a trusty man . he will be week , however , before we hear from him . " " here be , the great , " cry , perceive our worthy merchant of among the crowd . " oh , , i have get diamond here what be worth three thousand pound , and you shall have them for shall , by , and we will go together now and get them ? " " do n't pester me ! " say , brush the little jew aside with his long , bony arm . " can i have a word with you , ? " " certainly , " reply the diamond dealer . be a very well-known man upon ' , and one who be universally respect and look up to . " what do you think about this report ? " he ask , in a confidential voice . " do you imagine that it will affect price in ? " " affect price ! my dear sir , if it prove true it will ruin the african field . the mere report come in a circumstantial fashion will send price down fifty per cent . " " as much as that ! " say the merchant , with an excellent affectation of surprise . " i be anxious about it , for my boy be out there . it be a hobby of his , and i let him go . i trust he will not be bite . " " he be much more likely to do the biting , " remark bluntly . he have meet in business more than once , and have be disagreeably impress by the young gentleman 's sharpness . " poor lad ! " say his father . " he be young , and have have little experience as yet . i hope all be well with him ! " he shake his head despondently , and walk slowly homewards , but his heart beat triumphantly within him , for he be assure now that the report would influence price as he have foresee , and the african firm reap the benefit of their daring speculation . have take up his quarter in two private room at the , , and have already gain a considerable reputation in the town by the engaging " abandon " of his manner , and by the munificent style in which he entertain the more prominent citizen of the little capital . his personal quality of strength and beauty have also win him the respect which physical gift usually command in primitive community , and the smart young attract custom to himself among the digger in a way which excite the jealousy of the whole tribe of elderly hebrew who have hitherto enjoy a monopoly of the trade . thus , he have already gain his object in make himself know , and his name be a familiar one in every camp from 's plant to 's . keep his headquarters at , he travel perpetually along the line of the diggings . all the time he be chafe secretly and marvel within himself how it be that no whisper of the expect news have arrive yet from . one sunny day he have return from a long ride , and , have dine , stroll out into the street , hat upon head and cigar in mouth . it be the 23rd of , and he have be nearly ten week in the colony . since his arrival he have take to grow a beard . otherwise , he be much as we have see him in , save that a ruddy glow of health shine upon his sunburned face . the life of the diggings appear to agree with him . as he turn down , a man pass him lead a pair of horse tired and dusty , with many a strap and buckle hang down behind them . after him come another lead a second pair , and after him another with a third . they be take them round to the stable . " ! " cry , with sudden interest ; " what be up ? " " the mail be just in . " " mail from ? " " yes . " quicken his pace and stride down into the , which , as the name imply , be the chief thoroughfare of . he come out close to the office of the and . there be a crowd in front of the door . this be a badly conduct newspaper , badly print upon bad paper , but sell at sixpence a copy , and charge from seven shilling and sixpence to a pound for the insertion of an advertisement . it be edit at present by a certain , who have be successively a dentist , a clerk , a provision merchant , an engineer , and a sign painter , and have fail at each and every one of these employment , have take to run a newspaper as an easy and profitable occupation . indeed , as manage by , the process be simplicity itself . have secure by the 's mail copy of the paper of two month before , he spend in cutting extract from them with the great impartiality , chop away everything which might be of value to him . the be occupy in curse at three black boy who help to put up the type , and on the a fresh number of the and be give to the world . the remain three day be devote by to intoxication , but the bring him back once more to soda water and literature . it be seldom , indeed , that the arouse interest enough to cause any one to assemble round the . 's heart give a quick flutter at the sight , and he gather himself together like a runner who see his goal in view . throw away his cigar , he hurry on ad join the little crowd . " what be the row ? " he ask . " there be news come by the mail , " say one or two bystander . " big news . " " what sort of news ? " " do n't know yet . " " who say there be news ? " " driver . " " where be he ? " " do n't know . " " who will know about it ? " " . " here there be a general shout from the crowd for , and an man , with a red bloated face and bristle hair come to the office door . " now , what the want ? " he roar , shake a quill pen at the crowd . " what be after at all ? have nothing to do than to block up the door of a decent office ? " " what be the news ? " cry a dozen voice . " the news , be it ? " roar , more angrily than ever ; " and ca n't out that by pay your sixpence like man , and take the ? it be a paper , though say it as should n't , that would cut out some o ' these and if it be only in . , instead of encourage local talent your stand around in the , and try to suck a man 's news out of him for nothing . " " look here , boss , " say a fellow in the front of the crowd , " you keep your hair on , and do n't get sling word about too freely , or it may be the bad for you and for your office too . we hear as there be big news , an ' we come down to hear it , but as to ' it without pay , that ai n't our sort . i suppose we can call it square if we each hand in sixpence , which be the price o ' your paper , and then you can tell us what be on . " consider for a moment . " it be worth a ' each , " he say , " for it play the with the circulation of a paper whin its news git out too soon . " " well , we wo n't stick at that , " say the miner . " what say you , boy ? " there be a murmur of assent , and a broad-brimmed straw hat be pass rapidly from hand to band . it be half full of silver when it reach . the have never before have such a circulation , for the crowd have rapidly increase during the preceding dialogue , and now number some hundred . " thank , , " say the editor . " well , what be the news ? " cry the impatient crowd . " sure i have n't open the bag yet , but i soon will . it be it be bind to be there . hey there , , 's brat , where be the mail bag ? " thus apostrophize , a sharp little come run out with the brown bag , and examine it in a leisurely manner , which elicit many an oath from the eager crowd . " here be the and the , " he say , hand the various paper out to his subordinate . " , there be not one of know the of a great paper this go , the brain and no profit at the of it . here be the and the . if you be man you will put in an advertisement wake , whether need it or not , just to encourage literature . here be the -- will be in here it be . " with great deliberation put on a pair of spectacle and fold the paper carefully round , so as to bring the principal page to the front . then he clear his throat , with the pomposity which be inseparable with most man from the act of read aloud . " go it , boss ! " cry his audience encouragingly . " ' at 's not it , be it ? ' and the at in ' ? be that of great ? ' " " that be it , " roar the crowd ; " let be hear about that . " there be an anxious ring in their voice , and their face be grave and serious as they look up at the reader upon the step of the office . " ' have be discover in , ' " read , " ' which be confidently state to exceed in riches anything which have exist before . it be anticipate that this discovery , if confirm , will have a most prejudicial effect upon the african trade . ' that be an extract from the news of the . " a buzz of ejaculation and comment arise from the crowd . " be n't there any more about it ? " they cry . " here be a late paper , boss , " say the little , who have be diligently look over the date . open it , and give a whistle of astonishment . " here be enough to satisfy you , " he say . " it be in big and take up the whole of the first page . i can only read the heading , for we must get to work and have out a special edition . you will git detail there , an ' it will be out in a few hour . look here at the fuss they have make about it . " the editor turn the paper as he speak , and exhibit a series of large black heading in this style : -- - . an . threaten extinction of the . great fall in price . opinion of the . full . " what think of that ? " cry , triumphantly , as if he have have some hand in the matter . " now i must git off to me work , and you will have it all before long in your hand . should bliss your star that have some one among to offer the of the late news . good to all , " and he trot back into his office with his hat and its silver content in his hand . the crowd break up into a score of gesticulate chatter group , and wander up or down the street . wait until they have clear away , and then step into the office of the advertiser " what be the matter now ? " ask , angrily . he be a man who live in a state of chronic irritation . " have you a duplicate of that paper ? " " suppose i have ? " " what will you sell it for ? " " what will you give ? " " half a sovereign . " " a sovereign . " " do ! " and so walk out of the office with full detail in his hand , and depart to his hotel , where he read the account through very slowly and deliberately . it appear to be satisfactory , for he chuckle to himself a good deal as he peruse it . have finish it , he fold the paper up , place it in his breast pocket , and , have order his horse , set off to the neighbour township of with the intention of carry the news with him . have two motive in gallop across the veldt that night . one be to judge with his own ear and eye what effect the news would have upon practical man . the other be a desire to gratify that sinister pleasure which an ill-natured man have in be the bearer of evil tidings . they have probably hear the report by this time , but it be unlikely that any detail have reach them . no one know good than young that this message from would bring utter ruin and extinction to many a small capitalist , that it would mean the shatter of a thousand hope , and the advent of poverty and misery to the man with whom he have be associate . in spite of this knowledge , his heart beat high , as his father 's have do in , and as he spur his horse onwards through the darkness , he be hardly able to refrain from shout and whoop in his exultation . the track from to be a rough one , but the moon be up , and the young merchant find no difficulty in follow it . when he reach the summit of the low hill over which the road run , he see the light of the little town sparkle in the valley beneath him . it be ten o'clock before he gallop into the main street , and he see at a glance that the news have , as he expect , arrive before him . in front of the a great crowd of miner have assemble , who be talk excitedly among themselves . the light of the torch shine down upon herculean figure , glaring shirt , and earnest bearded face . the whole camp appear to have assemble there to discuss the situation , and it be evident from their anxious countenance and subdued voice , that they take no light view of it . the instant the young man alight from his horse he be surround by a knot of eager questioner . " you have just come from , " they cry . " what be the truth of it , ? let us know the truth of it . " " it be a bad business , my friend , " he answer , look around at the ring of inquire face . " i have be read a full account of it in the . they have make a great find in . there seem to be no doubt at all about the matter . " " think it will send price down here as much as they say ? " " i be afraid it will send them very low . i hold a lot of stone myself , and i should be very glad to get rid of them at any price . i fear it will hardly pay you to work your claim now . " " and the price of claim will go down ? " " of course it will . " " , mister , what be that ? " cry a haggard , unkempt little man , push his way to the front and catch hold of 's sleeve to ensure his attention . " do say it would send the price o ' claim down ? you do n't say that , do you ? why , in course , it stand to reason that what happen in could n't make no difference over here . that be sense , mate , ai n't it ? " he look round him appealingly , and laugh a little nervous laugh . " you try , " say coldly . " if you get one-third of what you give for your claim you will be lucky . why , man , you do n't suppose we produce diamond for local consumption . they be for export to , and if be already supply by , where be you to get your market ? " " that be it ? " cry several voice . " if you take my advice , " continue , " you will get rid of what you have at any loss , for the time may be come when you will get nothing at all . " " now , look at that ! " cry the little man , throw out his hand . " they call me unlucky , and i will be to the end of the chapter . why , boss , me and have sink every damned cent we have get in that claim , the fruit o ' nine year ' hard work , and here you come ' up as cool as may be , and tell me that it be all go for nothing . " " well , there be other who will suffer as well as you , " say one of the crowd . " i reckon we be all hit pretty hard if this be true , " remark another . " i be fair sick of it , " say the little man , pass his grimy hand across his eye and leave a black smear as he do so . " this ai n't the first , nor the my luck have play me this trick . i have a mighty good mind to throw up my hand altogether . " " come in and have some whisky , " say a rough sympathizer , and the unlucky one be hustle in through the rude door of the , there to find such comfort as he might from the multitudinous bottle which adorn the interior of that building . liquor have lose its efficacy that evening , however , and a dead depression rest over the little town . nor be it confine to . all along the diggings the dismal tidings spread with a rapidity which be astonishing . at eleven o'clock there be consternation at . at one be up and aghast at the news . at three in the morning a mounted messenger gallop into , and before daybreak a digger committee be sit at 's discuss the situation . so during that eventful night down the whole long line of the vaal river there be ruin and heartburning and dismay , while five thousand mile away an old gentleman be sleep calmly and dreamlessly in his comfortable bed , from whose busy brain have emanate all this misery and misfortune . perhaps the say old gentleman might have slumber a little less profoundly could he have see the sight which meet his son 's eye on the follow morning . have pass the night at , in the hut of a hospitable miner . have rise in the morning , he be dress himself in a leisurely , methodical fashion , when his host , who have be inhale the morning breeze , thrust his head through the window . " come out here , , " he cry . " there be some fun on . one of the boy be dead drunk , and they be carry him in . " pull on his coat and run out . a little group of miner be walk slowly up the main street . he and his host be wait for the procession to pass them with several jocose remark appropriate to the occasion ready upon their lip , when their eye fall upon a horrible red track which mark the road the party have take . they both run forward with exclamation and inquiry . " it be , " say one of the bearer . " him that they use to call . " " what be up with him ? " " he have shoot himself through the head . where think we find him ? slap in the middle o ' his own claim , with his finger dig into the gravel , as dead as a herring . " " he be a bad pluck ' to knock under like that , " 's companion remark . " yes , " say the croupier of the saloon gambling table . " if he have wait for another deal he might have hold every trump . he be always a soft chap , be , and he be say last night as how this spoil the last chance he be ever like to have of see his wife and in . he have blow a fine clean hole in himself . would you like to see it , ? " the fellow be about to remove the blood-stained handkerchief which cover the dead man 's face , but recoil in horror . " look faint like , " some one observe . " yes , " say , who be white to his very lip . " this have upset me rather . i will have a drop of brandy . " as he walk back to the hut , he wonder inwardly whether the incident would have discompose his father . " i suppose he would call it part of our commercial finesse , " he say bitterly to himself . " however , we have put our hand to the plough , and we must not let homicide stop us . " so say , he steady his nerve with a draught of brandy , and prepare for the labour of the day . the crisis at the african field be even more acute than have be anticipate by the conspirator . nothing approach to it have ever be know in before . diamond go steadily down in value until they be sell at a price which no dealer would have believe possible , and the sale of claim reach such a climax that man be glad to get rid of them for the mere price of the plant and machinery erect at them . the office of the various dealer at be besiege night and day by an importunate crowd of miner , who be willing to sell at any price in order to save something from the general ruin which they imagine be about to come upon the industry . some , more long-headed or more desperate than their neighbour , continue to work their claim and to keep the stone which they find until price might be good . as fresh mail come from the , however , each confirm and amplify the ominous news , these independent worker grow few and more faint-hearted , for their boy have to be pay each week , and where be the money to come from with which to pay them ? the dealer , too , begin to take the alarm , and the most tempting offer would hardly induce them to give hard cash in exchange for stone which might prove to be a drug in the market . everywhere there be misery and stagnation . be not slow to take advantage of this state of thing , but he be too cunning to do so in a manner which might call attention to himself or his movement . in his wandering he have come across an outcast name , a man who have once be a clergyman and a master of art of , , but who be now a broken-down gambler with a slender purse and a still more slender conscience . he still retain a plausible manner and an engaging address , and these quality first recommend him to the notice of the young merchant . a couple of day after the receipt of the news from , send for this fellow and sit with him for some time on the verandah of the hotel , talk over the situation . " you see , , " he remark , " it might be a false alarm , might it not ? " the nod . he be a man of few word . " if it should be , it would be an excellent thing for those who buy now . " nod once again . " of course , " continue , " it look as if the thing be beyond all doubt . my experience have teach me , however , that there be nothing so uncertain as a certainty . that be what make me think of speculate over this . if i lose it wo n't hurt me much , and i might win . i come out here more for the sake of see a little of the world than anything else , but now that this have turn up i will have a shy at it . " " quite so , " say , rub his hand . " you see , " continue , light a cheroot , " i have the name here of have a long purse and of know which way the wind blow . if i be to be see buy other would follow my lead , and price would soon be as high as ever . now , what i purpose be to work through you , see ? you can take out a licence and buy in stone on the quiet without attract much attention . beat them down as low as you can , and give this hotel as your address . when they call here they shall be pay , which be well than have you carry the money round with you . " the clergyman scowl as though he think it be anything but good . he do not make any remark , however . " you can get one or two fellow to help you , " say . " i will pay for their licence . i ca n't expect you to work all the camp yourself . of course , if you offer more for a stone than i care to give , that be your look out , but if you do your work well you shall not be the loser . you shall have a percentage on business do and a weekly salary as well . " " how much money do you care to invest ? " ask . " i be not particular , " answer . " if i do a thing i like to do it well . i will go the length of thirty thousand pound . " be so astonish at the magnitude of the sum that he sink back in his chair in bewilderment . " why , sir , " he say , " i think just at present you could buy the country for that . " laugh . " we will make it go as far as we can , " he say . " of course you may buy claim as well as stone . " " and i have carte blanche to that amount ? " " certainly . " " all right , i will begin this evening , " say the ; and pick up his slouch hat , which he still wear somewhat broad in the brim than his comrade , in deference to old association , he depart upon his mission . be a clever man and soon choose two active subordinate . these be a navvy , name , and , a young welshman , who have disappear from home behind a cloud of forge cheque , and have change his name have make a fresh start in life to the south of the equator . these three work day and night buying in stone from the more needy and impecunious miner , to whom ready money be a matter of absolute necessity . buy in the stock , too , of several small dealer whose nerve have be shake by the panic . in this way bag after bag be fill with diamond by , while he himself be to all appearance do nothing but smoking cigar and sip in front of the he be become somewhat uneasy in his mind as to how long the delusion would be keep up , or how soon news might come from the that the find have be examine into and have prove to be a myth . in any case , he think that he would be free from suspicion . still , it might be as well for him by that time to be upon his homeward journey , for he know that if by any chance the true fact leak out there would be no hope of mercy from the furious digger . hence he incite to great speed , and that worthy divine with his two agent work so energetically that in less than a week there be little leave of five and thirty thousand pound . have show his power of read character when he choose the as his subordinate . it be possible , however , that the young man 's judgment have be inferior to his power of observation . a clever man as a trusty ally be a valuable article , but when the say cleverness may be turn against his employer the advantage become a questionable one . it be perfectly evident to that though a stray capitalist might risk a thousand pound or so on a speculation of this sort , himself would hardly care to invest such a sum as have pass through his hand without have some ground on which to go . have form this conclusion , and have also turn over in his mind the remarkable coincidence that the news of this discovery in should follow so very rapidly upon the visit of the junior partner of the of , the astute clergyman begin to have some dim perception of the truth . hence he brood a good deal as he go about his work , and cogitate deeply in a manner which be once again distinctly undesirable in so very intelligent a subordinate . these and cogitation culminate in a meeting , which be hold by him with his two in the private parlour of the 's retreat . it be a , room , with a profusion of spittoon scatter over it , which , to judge by the condition of the floor , the patron of the establishment have take some pain to avoid . round a solid , old-fashioned table in the centre of this apartment sit 's staff of assistant , the parson thoughtful but self-satisfied , the other sullen and inquisitive . have convene the meeting , and his comrade have an idea that there be something in the wind . they apply themselves steadily , therefore , to the bottle of upon the table , and wait for him to speak . " well , " the say at last , " the game be nearly over , and we will not be want any more . be off to in a day or two . " and groan sympathetically . work be scarce in the diggings during the crisis , and their agency have be pay them well . " yes , he be off , " go on , glance keenly at his companion , " and he take with him five and thirty thousand pound worth of diamond that we buy for him . poor devil like us , , have to do the work , and then be throw aside as you would throw your pick aside when you be do with it . when he sell out in and make his pile , it wo n't much matter to him that the three man who help him be starve in . " " wo n't he give us ' at ' ? " ask , the navvy . he be a , hairy man , with a face and eyebrow . " wo n't he give us nothing to remembrance him by ? " " give you something ! " say with a sneer . " why , man , he say you be too well pay already . " " do he , though ? " cry the navvy , flush even red than nature have make him . " be that the way he speak after we make him ? it ai n't on the square . i like to see thing honest an ' above board betwixt man an ' man , and this ' of them as have help over ai n't that . " lower his voice and bend further over the table . his companion involuntarily imitate his movement , until the three cunning , cruel face be look closely into one another be eye . " nobody know that he hold those stone , " say . " he be too smart to let it out to any one but ourselves . " " where do he keep ' em ? " ask the welshman . " in a safe in his room . " " where be the key ? " " on his watch-chain . " " could we get an impression ? " " i have one . " " then i can make one , " cry triumphantly . " it be do , " say , take a small key from his pocket . " this be a duplicate , and will open the safe . i take the moulding from his key while i be speak to him . " the navvy laugh hoarsely . " if that do n't lick creation for smartness ! " he cry . " and how be we to get to this safe ? it would serve him right if we collar the lot . it will teach him that if he ai n't honest by nature he be get to be when he deal with the like of us . i like straightness , and by the i will have it ! " he bring his great fist down upon the table to emphasize this commendable sentiment . " it be not an easy matter , " say thoughtfully . " when he go out he lock his door , and there be no get in at the window . there be only one chance for us that i can see . his room be a bit cut off from the rest of the hotel . there be a gallery of twenty foot or more that lead to it . now , i be think that if the three of us be to visit him some evening , just to wish him luck on his journey , as it be , and if , while we be in the room something sudden be to happen which would knock him silly for a minute or two , we might walk off with the stone and be clean go before he could raise an alarm . " " and what would knock him silly ? " ask . he be an unhealthy , youth , and his pallid complexion have assume a greenish tinge of fear as he listen to the clergyman 's word . he have the makings in him of a mean and dangerous criminal , but not of a violent to the jackal tribe rather than to the tiger . " what would knock him senseless ? " ask , with a know look . laugh again in his bushy , red beard . " you can leave that to me , mate , " he say . glance from one to the other and he become even more cadaverous . " i be not in it , " he stammer . " it will be a hang job . you will kill him as like as not . " " not in it , ai n't ? " growl the navvy . " why , you white-livered hound , you be too deep in it ever to get out again . think we will let you spoil a lay of this sort as we might never get a chance of again ? " " you can do it without me , " say the welshman , tremble in every limb . " and have you ' on us the moment a reward be offer . no , no , chummy , you do n't get out of it that way . if you wo n't stand by us , i will take care you do n't split . " " think of the diamond , " put in . " think of your own skin , " say the navvy . " you could go back to a rich man if you do it . " " you will never go back at all if you do n't . " thus work upon alternately by his hope and by his fear , show some sign of yield . he take a long draught from his glass and fill it up again . " i ai n't afraid , " he say . " do n't imagine that i be afraid . you wo n't hit him very hard , ? " " just enough to curl him up , " the navvy answer . " love , it ai n't the first man by many a one that i have lay on his back , though i never have the chance before of fingering five and thirty thousand pound worth of diamond for my pain . " " but the and the servant ? " " that be all right , " say . " you leave it to me . if we go up quietly and openly , and come down quietly and openly , who be to suspect anything ? our horse will be outside , in , and we will be out of their reach in no time . shall we say evening for the job ? " " that be very early , " cry tremulously . " the sooner the good , " say , with an oath . " and look here , young man , " fix with his bloodshot eye , " one sign of draw back , and by the live jingo i will let you have more than i be keep for him . you hear me , ? " he grasp the youth 's white wrist and squeeze it in his iron grip until he writhe with the pain . " oh , i be with you , heart and soul , " he cry . " i be sure what you and advise must be for the good . " " meet here at eight o'clock night then , " say the leader . " we can get it over by nine , and we will have the night for our escape . i will have the horse ready , and it will be strange if we do n't get such a start as will puzzle them . " so , have arrange all the detail of their little plan , these three gentleman depart in different to the , to give his evening report , and the other to the , which be the scene of their labour . the meeting just describe take place upon a , early in . on the have fully make up his mind to turn his back upon the diggings and begin his homeward journey . he be pine for the pleasure of his old life , and be weary of the monotonous expanse of the south african veldt . his task be do , too , and it would be well for him to be at a distance before the digger discover the manner in which they have be hoax . he begin to pack his box , therefore , and to make every preparation for his departure . he be busily engage in this employment upon the evening when there be a tap at the door and walk in , accompany by and . glance up at them , and greet them briefly . he be not surprise at their visit , for they have come together several time before to report progress or make arrangement . bow as he enter the room , nod , and rub his hand together and look amiably bilious . " we look in , , " begin , " to learn if you have any command for us . " " i tell you before that i have not , " say curtly . " i be go on . i have make a mistake in speculate on those diamond . price be sink low and low . " " i be sorry to hear that , " say sympathetically . " maybe the market will take a turn . " " let us hope so , " the merchant answer . " it do n't look like it . " " but you be satisfy with us , guv'nor , " strike in , push his bulky form in front of . " we have do our work all right , have n't we ? " " i have nothing to complain of , " say coldly . " well then , guv'nor , you surely ai n't go away without leave us nothing to remembrance you with , see that we have stand by you and never go back on you . " " you have be pay every week for what you have do , " the young man say . " you wo n't get another penny out of me , so you set your mind at rest about that . " " you wo n't give us nothing ? " cry the navvy angrily . " no , i wo n't ; and i will tell you what it be , , big as you be , if you dare to raise your voice in my presence i will give you the sound hiding that ever you have in your life . " have stand up and show every indication of be as good as his word . " do n't let us quarrel the last time we may meet , " cry , intervene between the two . " it be not money we expect from you . all we want be a drain of rum to drink success to you with . " " oh , if that be all , " say the young turn round to pick up the bottle which stand on a table behind him . quick as a flash spring upon him and strike him down with a life-preserver . with a gasp cry and a heavy thud fall face downwards upon the floor , the bottle still clutch in his senseless hand , and the escape rum form a horrible mixture with the blood which stream from a great gash in his head . " very pretty indeed ! " cry the , in a quiet tone of critical satisfaction , as a connoisseur might speak of a specimen which interest him . he be already busy at the door of the safe . " well do , , well do ! " cry , in a quiver voice ; and go up to the body he kick it in the side . " you see i be not afraid , , be i ? " " stow your gab ! " snarl the navvy . " here be the rum all ' loose . " pick up the bottle he take a pull of what be leave in it . " here be the bag , parson , " he whisper , pull a black linen bag from his pocket . " we have n't make much noise over the job . " " here be the stone , " say , in the same quiet voice . " hold the mouth open . " he empty an avalanche of diamond into the receptacle . " here be some note and gold . we may as well have them too . now , tie it up carefully . that be the way ! if we meet any one on the stair , take it coolly . turn that lamp out , , so that if any one look in he will see nothing . come along ! " the guilty trio steal out of the room , bear their plunder with them , and walk down the passage of the hotel unmolest and unharmed . the moon , as it rise over the veldt that night , shine on three horseman spur it along the road as though their very life depend upon their speed . its calm , clear ray stream over the silent roof of and in through a particular window of the , throw silvery patch upon the carpet , and cast strange shadow from the figure which lie as it have fall , huddle in an ungainly heap upon the floor . it might perhaps have be as well for the curtail of this narrative , and for the interest of the world at large if the blow deal by the sturdy right arm of the navvy have cut short once for all the career of the junior african merchant . , however , be endow with a rare vitality , which enable him not only to shake off the effect of his mishap , but to do so in an extraordinarily short space of time . there be a groan from the prostrate figure , then a feeble movement , then another and a loud groan , and then an oath . gradually raise himself upon his elbow , he look around him in a bewilder way , with his other hand press to the wound at the back of his head , from which a few narrow little rivulet of blood be still meander . his glance wander vaguely over the table and the chair and the wall , until it rest upon the safe . he could see in the moonlight that it be open , and empty . in a moment the whole circumstance of the case come back to him , and he stagger to the door with a hoarse cry of rage and of despair . whatever 's fault may have be , irresolution or want of courage be not among them . in a moment he grasp the situation , and realize that it be absolutely essential that he should act , and at once . the stone must be recover , or utter and irretrievable ruin stare him in the face . at his cry the landlord and several attendant , white and black , come rush into the room . " i have be rob and assault , " say , steady himself against the mantelpiece , for he be still weak and giddy . " do n't all start cackle , but do what i ask you . light the lamp ! " the lamp be light , and there be a murmur from the little knot of employee , reinforce by some late lounger at the bar , as they see the disorder room and the great crimson patch upon the carpet . " the thief call at nine , " say , talk rapidly , but collectedly . " their name be , , and . we talk for , some little time , so they probably do not leave the house before a quarter past at the soonest . it be now ten , so they have no very great start . you , , and you , , run out and find if three man have be see get away . perhaps they take a buggy . go up and down , and ask all you see . you , , go as hard as you can to . tell him there have be robbery and attempted murder , and say that i want half a dozen of his good mount his good man , you understand , but his good horse . i shall see that he be no loser if he be smart . where be my servant ? , you dog , get my horse saddle and bring her round . she ought to be able to catch anything in . " as give his order the man hurry off in different direction to carry them out . he himself commence to arrange his dress , and tie a handkerchief tightly round his head . " surely you be not go , sir ? " the landlord say , " you be not fit . " " fit or not , i be go , " say resolutely . " if i have to be strap to my horse i will go . send me up some brandy . put some in a flask , too . i may feel faint before i get back . " a great concourse of people have assemble by this time , attract by the report of the robbery . the whole square in front of the hotel be crowd with digger and and innumerable , all press up to the portico in the hope of hear some fresh detail . , over the way , be already busy set up his type in preparation for a special edition , in which the should give its version of the affair . in the office the great man himself , who be just convalesce from an attack of ardent spirit , be busily engage , with a wet towel round his head , write a leader upon the event . this production , which be very sonorous and effective , be pepper all over with such phrase as " protection of property , " " outraged majesty of the law , " and " scum of -- expression which have be use so continuously by , that he have come to think that he have a copyright in them , and loudly accuse the paper of plagiarism if he happen to see them in their column . there be a buzz of excitement among the crowd when appear on the step of the hotel , look as white as a sheet , with a handkerchief bind round his head and his collar all crust with blood . as he mount his horse one of his emissary rush to him . " if you please , sir , " he say , " they have take the road . a dozen people see them . their horse be not up to much , for i know the man they get them from . you be sure to catch them . " a smile play over 's pale face , which bode little good for the fugitive . " curse those police ! " he cry ; " be they never go to come ? " " here they be ! " say the landlord ; and sure enough , with a jingle of arm and a clatter of hoof , half a dozen of the trot through the crowd and draw up in front of the step . they be smart , active young fellow , arm with revolver and sabre , and their horse be tough brute , to look at , but with wonderful stay power . note the fact with satisfaction as he ride up to the grizzled sergeant in command . " there be not a moment to be lose , sergeant , " he say . " they have an hour and a half 's start , but their cattle be not up to much . come on ! it be the road . a hundred pound if we catch them ! " " three ! " roar the sergeant . " right half ! " the crowd split asunder , and the little troop , with at their head , cleave a path through them . " gallop ! " shout the sergeant , and away they clatter down the of , strike fire out of the stone and splash up the gravel , until the sound of their hoof die away into a dull , subdued rattle , and finally fade altogether from the ear of the listen crowd . for the first few mile the party gallop in silence . the moon be still shine brilliantly , and they could see the white line of the road stretch out in front of them and wind away over the undulate veldt . to right and leave spread a broad expanse of wiry grass stretch to the horizon , with low bush and scrub scatter over it in patch . here and there be group of long-legged , sheep , who crash through the bush in wild terror as the rider sweep by them . their plaintive call be the only sound which break the silence of the night , save the occasional dismal hoot of the veldt owl . , on his powerful grey , have be ride somewhat ahead of the trooper , but the sergeant manage to get abreast of him . " beg pardon , sir , " he say , raise his hand to his kepi , " but do n't you think this pace be too good to last ? the horse will be blow . " " as long as we catch them , " answer , " i do n't care what become of the horse . i would sooner stand you a dozen horse apiece than let them get away . " the young merchant 's word be firm and his seat steady , in spite of the throb at his head . the fury in his heart supply him with strength , and he gnaw his moustache in his impatience and dig his spur into his horse 's flank until the blood trickle down its glossy coat . , reputation , above all , revenge , all depend upon the issue of this headlong chase through the darkness . the sergeant and gallop along , leather to leather , and rein to rein , while the troop clatter in their rear . " there be about two mile further on , " say the sergeant ; " we will hear news of them there . " " they ca n't get off the high road , can they ? " " not likely , sir . they could n't get along as fast anywhere else . indeed , it be hardly safe riding across the veldt . they might be down a pit before they know of it . " " as long as they be on the road , we must catch them , " quoth ; " for if it run straight from here to hell i would follow them there . " " and we will stand by you , sir , " say the sergeant , catch something of his companion 's enthusiasm . " at this pace , if the horse hold out , we might catch them before morning . there be the light of the shanty . " as he speak they be gallop round a long curve in the road , at the further end of which there be a feeble yellow glimmer . as they come abreast of it they see that the light come through an open door , in the centre of which a burly afrikaner be stand with his hand in his breeches pocket and his pipe in his mouth . " good evening , " say the sergeant , as his man pull up their reek horse . " have any one pass this way before us ? " " many a have pass this way before you , " say the dutchman , take his pipe out of his mouth to laugh . " , man , ! " the sergeant cry angrily . " oh yes ; down the there , not one hour ago . three man ride fit to kill their horse . " " that will do , " shout ; and away they go once more down the broad white road . they pass 's at two in the morning , and be at 's farm at . at three they leave the far behind them , and at a quarter past four they sweep down the main street of the little township of , their horse weak and weary and all mottle with foam . there be a police patrol in the street . " have any one pass ? " cry the sergeant . " three man , a quarter of an hour ago . " " have they go on ? " " straight on . their horse be nearly dead beat , though . " " come on ! " cry eagerly . " come on ! " " four of the horse be exhaust , sir , " say the sergeant . " they ca n't move another step . " " come on without them then . " " the patrol could come , " the sergeant suggest . " i should have to report myself at the office , sir , " say the trooper . " jump on to his horse , sergeant , " cry . " he can take yours to report himself on . now then you and i at least be bind to come up with them . forward ! gallop ! " and they start off once more on their wild career , rouse the quiet burgher of by the wild turmoil of their hoof . out once more upon the it be a clear race between the pursuer and the pursue . the former know that the fugitive , be it daytime , would possibly be within sight of them , and the thought give them additional ardour . the sergeant have a fresh horse ride in front , his head down and his body forward , get every possible inch of pace out of the animal . at his heel come , on his gallant grey , the blood-stained handkerchief flutter from his head . he be sit very straight in his saddle with a set stern smile upon his lip . in his right hand he hold a cock revolver . a hundred yard or so behind them the two remain trooper come toil along upon their weary nag , work hard with whip and spur to stimulate them to further exertion . away in the east a long rosy streak lie low upon the horizon , which show that dawn be approach , and a grey light steal over the landscape . suddenly the sergeant pull his horse up . " there be some one come towards us , " he cry . and the trooper halt their pant steed . through the uncertain light they see a solitary horseman ride down the road . at first they have think that it might possibly be one of the fugitive who have turn , but as he come near they perceive that it be a stranger . his clothes be so dusty and his horse so and weary that it be evident that he also have leave many a long mile of road behind him . " have you see three man on horseback ? " cry as he approach . " i speak to them , " the traveller answer . " they be about half a mile ahead . " " come on ! come on ! " shout . " i be bring news from -- " the man say . " come on ! " interrupt furiously ; and the horse stretch their stiff limb into a feeble lumbering gallop . and the sergeant shoot to the front , and the other follow as good they might . suddenly in the stillness they hear far away a dull rattle sound like the clatter of distant castanets . " it be their horse ' hoof ! " cry ; and the trooper behind raise a cheer to show that they too understand the significance of the sound . it be a wild , lonely spot , where the plain be bare even of the scanty foliage which usually cover it . here and there great granite rock protrude from the brown soil , as though 's covering have in bygone day be rend until her gaunt bone protrude through the wound . as and the sergeant sweep round a sharp turn in the road they see , some little way ahead of them , the three fugitive , envelop in a cloud of dust . almost at the same moment they hear a shout and crash behind them , and , look round , see a confused heap upon the ground . the horse of the lead trooper have fall from pure fatigue , and have roll over upon its rider . the other trooper have dismount , and be endeavour to extricate his companion . " let us see if he be hurt , " the sergeant cry . " on ! on ! " shout , whose passion be increase by the sight of the thief . " not a foot back . " " he may have break his neck , " grumble the sergeant , draw his revolver . " have your pistol ready , sir . we shall be up with them in a few minute , and they may show fight . " they be up with them rather sooner than the policeman expect . , find that speed be of no avail , and that the number of his pursuer be now reduce to two , have recourse to strategy . there be a sharp turn in the road a hundred yard ahead , and on reach it the three fling themselves off their horse and lay down behind cover . as and the sergeant , the grey horse and the bay , come thundering round the curve , there be a fierce splutter of pistol shot from amongst the bush , and the grey sink down upon its knee with a sob moan , strike mortally in the head . spring to his foot and rush at the ambuscade , while the sergeant , who have be graze on the cheek by the first volley , jump from his horse and follow him . and meet them foot to foot with all the saxon gallantry which underlie the saxon brutality . stab at the sergeant and strike him through the muscle of the neck . fire at the policeman , and be himself shoot down by . , see his companion fall , spring past his two assailant with a vicious side blow at the merchant , and throw himself upon the sergeant 's horse , regardless of a bullet from the latter 's revolver , he gallop away , and be speedily out of range . as to , from the beginning of the skirmish he have lie face downwards upon the ground , twist his thin limb about in an agony of fear , and howl for mercy . " he be go ! " say ruefully , gaze after the fugitive . " we have nothing to go after him with . " " i be well-nigh go myself , " say the policeman , mop up the blood from his stab , which be more painful than dangerous . " he have give me a nasty prod . " " never mind , my friend , you shall not be the loser . get up , you little viper ! " -- to , who be still writhe himself into the most extraordinary attitude . " oh , please , , " he cry , clutch at 's boot with his long thin finger , " it be n't me that hit you . it be . i have nothing to do with rob you either . that be . i would n't have go with him , only i know that he be a clergyman , so i expect no harm . i be surprise at you , , i really be . i be very glad that have shoot you . " the be sit with his back against a gnarled stump , which give him some support . he have his hand to his chest , and as he breathe a ghastly whistling sound come from the wound , and spirt of blood rush from his mouth . his glaze eye be fix upon the man who have shoot him , and a curious smile play about his thin lip . " come here , , " he croak ; " come here . " stride over to him with a face as inexorable as fate . " you have do for me , " say faintly . " it be a queer end for the good man of his year at of art , sir , and . not much worth now , be it ? who will have think then that i should have die like a dog in this wilderness ? what be the odd how a man die though . if i have keep myself straight i should have go off a few year later in a feather bed as the of 's may be . what will that matter ? i have enjoy die man 's eye glisten at the thought of past dissipation . " if i have my time to do over again , " he continue , " i will enjoy myself the same way . i be not penitent , sir . no death-bed snivel about me , or short cut into heaven . that be not what i want to say though . i have a choke in the throat , but i dare say you can hear what i be drive at . you meet a man ride towards , do you not ? " nod sullenly . " you do n't speak to him ? too busy try to catch yours truly , ? will you have your stone back , for they be in the bag by my side , but they will not be very much good to you . the little spec wo n't come off this time . you do n't know what the news be that the man be bring ? " a vague feeling of impending misfortune steal over . he shake his head . " his news be , " say , lean up upon his hand , " that fresh diamond field have be discover at , in the . so , or no , stone will not rise . ! ! will not rise . look at his face ! it be white than mine . ! ! ! " with the laugh upon his lip , a great flow of blood stop the clergyman 's utterance , and he roll slowly over upon his side , a dead man . during the month which have spend in the affair of the firm in have be exceedingly prosperous . trade upon the coast have be brisk than usual , and three of the company 's ship have come in at short interval with excellent cargo . among these be the which , to the astonishment of and the disgust of his employer , have weather a severe gale in the , and have arrive safe and sound once more . this run of luck , supplement by the business capacity of the old merchant and the indomitable energy of young , make the concern look so flourish that the former feel more than ever convince that if he could but stave off the immediate danger thing would soon right themselves . hence he read with delight the letter from , in which his son narrate the success of the conspiracy and the manner in which the miner have be hoodwink . the old man 's figure grow straight and his step more firm as the conviction grow upon him that the company would soon return once again to its former condition of affluence . it may be imagine , therefore , that when the rumour of a bona fide diamond find in the come to his ear be much agitate and distress . on the same day that he see the announcement in the paper he receive a letter from his son announce the failure of their enterprise . after narrate the robbery , the pursuit , the death of , and the announcement of the new discovery , it give an account of his subsequent movement . " there be no doubt about the truth of the scoundrel 's word , " he say , " for when we go to the near farm to get some food and have the sergeant 's wound dress we find that every one be talk about it . there be a chap there who have just come from the and know all about it . after hear the detail from him i see that there be no doubt of the genuineness of the thing . " the police ride back to with , and i promise to come after them ; but when i come to think it over it do n't seem good enough . the fact of my have so many diamond would set every tongue wag , and , again , the sergeant have hear what say to me , so it be very possible that i might have the whole district about my ear . as it be , i have the stone and all my money in the bag . i write back to the hotel , therefore , tell the landlord to send on my traps to by mail , and promise to settle my bill with him when i receive them . i then buy a horse and come straight south . i shall take the first steamer and be with you within a few day of your receive this . " as to our speculation , it be , of course , all up . even when the russian business prove to be a hoax , the price of stone will remain very low on account of these new field . it be possible that we may sell our lot at some small profit but it wo n't be the royal road to a fortune that you prophesy , nor will it help the firm out of the rut into which you have shove it . my only regret in leave like this be that that vermin will have no one to prosecute him . my head be almost well now . " this letter be a rude shock to the african merchant . within a week of the receipt of it his son , gloomy and travel-stained , walk into the sanctum at and confirm all the evil tidings by word of mouth . the old man be of too tough a fibre to break down completely , but his bony hand close convulsively upon the arm of the chair , and a cold perspiration break out upon his wrinkle forehead as he listen to such detail as his son vouchsafe to afford him . " you have your stone all safe , though ? " he stammer out at last . " they be in my box , at home , " say , gloomy and morose , lean against the white marble mantelpiece . " the know what they be worth ! we will be lucky if we clear as much as they cost and a margin for my expense and 's . a break head be all that i have get from your fine scheme . " " who could foresee such a thing ? " the old man say plaintively . he might have add 's thousand pound as another item to be clear , but he think it as well to keep silent upon the point . " any fool could foresee the possibility of it , " quoth brusquely . " the fall in price be sure to be permanent , then ? " the old man ask . " it will last for some year , any way , " answer . " the gravel be very rich , and there seem to be plenty of it . " " and within a few month we must repay both capital and interest . we be ruin ! " the old merchant speak in a break voice , and his head sink upon his breast . " when that day come , " he continue , " the firm which have be for thirty year above reproach , and a model to the whole , will be proclaim as a bankrupt concern . worse still , it will be show to have be keep afloat for year by mean which will be deem fraudulent . i tell you , my dear son , that if any mean could be devise which would avert -- any should not hesitate to adopt them . i be a frail old man , and i feel that the short balance of my life would be a small thing for me to give in return for the assurance that the work which i have build up should not be altogether throw away . " " your life can affect the matter one way or the other unless it be more heavily insure than it be , " say callously , though somewhat move by his father 's intensity of manner . " perhaps there be some way out of the wood yet , " he add , in a more cheerful tone . " it be so pay , so be what go to my heart . if it have ruin itself it would be easy to bear it , but it be sacrifice to outside wretched , wretched speculation . that be what make it so hard . " he touch the bell , and answer the summons . " listen to this , . what be our turn over last month , ? " " fifteen thousand pound , sir , " say the little clerk , bob up and down like a buoy in a gale in his delight at see the junior partner once again . " and the expense ? " " nine thousand three hundred . uncommon brown you look , , to be sure , uncommon brown and well . i hope as you enjoy yourself in , sir , and be too much for them and . " with this profound ethnological remark bob himself out of the room and go back radiantly to his desk . " look at that , " the old man say , when the click of the outer door show that the clerk be out of . " over five thousand profit in a month . be it not terrible that such a business should go to ruin ? what a fortune it would have be for you ! " " by heaven , it must be save ! " cry , with meditative brow and hand plunge deep in his trouser pocket . " there be that girl 's money . could we not get the temporary use of it . " " impossible ! " his father answer with a sigh . " it be so tie up in the will that she can sign it away herself until she come of age . there be no way of touch it except by her by her death . " " then we must have it by the only mean open to us . " " and that be ? " " i must marry her . " " you will ? " " i shall . here be my hand on it . " " then we be save , " cry the old man , throw up his tremulous hand . " & will weather the storm yet . " " but become a sleeping partner , " say . " it be for my own sake i do it and not for yours , " with which frank remark he draw his hat down over his brow and set off for . during 's absence in our heroine 's life have be even less eventful than of old . there be a consistency about the merchant 's establishment which be characteristic of the man . the house itself be austere and gloomy , and every separate room , in spite of profuse expenditure and gorgeous furniture , have the same air of discomfort . the servant too , be , with one single exception , from the housekeeper to the footman , a depressing and melancholy race . the only departure from this general rule be 's own maid , , a , dark-eyed , young woman , who raise up her voice and weep when depart for . this damsel 's presence be most disagreeable to , and , indeed , to also , who only retain her on account of his son 's strong view upon the subject , and out of fear of an explosion which might wreck all his plan . the old merchant be 's only companion during this period , and their conversation be usually limit to a conventional inquiry at breakfast time as to each other 's health . on his return from the in the evening be always in a moody humour , and would eat his dinner hastily and in silence . after dinner he be in the habit of read methodically the various financial article in the day 's paper , which would occupy him until bedtime . occasionally his companion would read these aloud to him , and such be the monotony of her uneventful life that she find herself become insensibly interested in the fluctuation of scrip or and share . the paper once exhaust , a bell be ring to summon the domestic , and when all be assemble the merchant , in a hard metallic voice , read through the lesson for the day and the evening prayer . on grand occasion he supplement this by a short address , in the course of which he would pelt his frightened audience with hard jagged text until he have reduce them to a fitting state of spiritual misery . no wonder that , under the influence of such an existence , the rose begin to fade from his ward 's cheek , and her youthful heart to grow sad and heavy . one daily tonic there be , however , which never desert her . strictly as guard her , and jealously as he fence her off from the outer world , he be unable to prevent this one little ray of light penetrate her prison . with an eye to the future he have so place her that it seem to him to be impossible that any sympathy could reach her from the outside world . visit and visitor be alike forbid to her . on no consideration be she to venture out alone . in spite of all his precaution , however , love have many art and wile which defy all opposition , and which can the deep of plotter . be by no means in a direct line between and the , yet morning and evening , as sure as the clock point to nine and to quarter to six , would stride through the old-fashioned square and past the grim house , whose grimness be soften to his eye through its association with the bright dream of his life . it be but the momentary glance of a sweet face at the upper window and a single wave of a white hand , but it send him on with a fresh heart and courage , and it break the dull monotony of her dreary life . occasionally , as we have see , he even manage to find his way into the interior of this ogre 's castle , in which his fair princess be immure . put an end to this by order that business message should never under any circumstance be convey to his private residence . nothing daunt , however , the lover soon devise another means of surmount the barrier which divide them . the centre of the square be take up by a garden , rectangular and uninviting , fence round with high forbid wall which shut out all intruder and give the place a resemblance to the exercise ground of a prison . within the rail be clump of bush , and here and there a few despondent tree droop their head as though mourn over the uncongenial site in which they have be plant . among these tree and bush there be scattered seat , and the whole estate be at the disposal of the inhabitant of , and be dignify by the name of the . this be the only spot in which be trust without the surveillance of a footman , and it be therefore a favourite haunt of hers , where she would read or work for hour under the shelter of the scanty foliage . hence it come about that one day , as be make his way at a rather early hour than be customary with him , he miss the usual apparition at the window . look round blankly in search of some explanation of this absence , he perceive in the garden a pretty white bonnet which glint among the leave , and on close inspection a pair of bright eye , which survey him merrily from underneath it . the gate be open , and in less time than it take to tell it the sacrilegious foot of the young man have invade the sacred domain devote to the sole use and behoof of the . it may be imagine that he be somewhat late at the office that morning and on many subsequent morning , until the clerk begin to think that their new employer be lose the enthusiasm for business which have possess him . frequently beg permission to inform of his engagement , but be inflexible upon that point . the fact be , that she know her guardian 's character very much good than her lover do , and remember his frequent exhortation upon the subject of the vanity and wickedness of such thing , she fear the effect of his anger when he learn the truth . in a year or so she would be of age and her own mistress , but at present she be entirely in his power . why should she subject herself to the certainty of constant harshness and unkindness which would await her ? have her guardian really fulfill the function of a father towards her he would have a right to be inform , but as it be she feel that she owe him no such duty . she therefore make up her mind that he should know nothing of the matter ; but the fate unfortunately will otherwise . it chance that one morning the interview between the lover have last rather longer than usual , and have be conclude by be return to the house , while remain sit upon the garden seat lose in such a reverie as affect man in his position . while thus pleasantly employ , his thought be suddenly recall to earth by the appearance of a dark shadow on the gravel in front of him , and look up he see the senior partner stand a short distance away and regard him with anything but an amiable expression upon his face . he have himself be have a morning stroll in the garden , and have oversee the whole of the recent interview without the preoccupied lover be aware of his presence . " be you come to the office ? " he ask sternly . " if so , we can go together . " rise and follow him out of the garden without a word . he know from the other 's expression that all be know to him , and in his heart he be not sorry . his only fear be that the old man 's anger might fall upon his ward and this he determine to prevent . they walk side by side as far as the station in complete silence , but on reach ask his young partner to step into his private sanctum . " now , sir , " he say , as he close the door behind him " i think that i have a right to inquire what the meaning may be of the scene of which i be an involuntary witness this morning ? " " it mean , " answer firmly but gently , " that i be engage to , and have be for some time . " " oh , indeed , " answer coldly , sit down at his desk and turn over the pile of letter . " at my request , " say , " our engagement be keep from your knowledge . i have reason to believe that you object to early engagement , and i fear that ours might be disagreeable to you . " i trust that the recording angel will not register a very black mark against our friend for this , the one and only falsehood that ever pass his lip . during the long silent walk the merchant have be revolve in his mind what course he should pursue , and he have come to the conclusion that it be more easy to guide this impetuous stream of youth than to attempt to stem it . he do not realize the strength of the tie that bind these two young people together , and imagine that with judgment and patience it might yet be snap . it be , therefore , with as good an imitation of geniality as his angular visage would permit of that he answer his companion 's confession . " you can hardly wonder at my be surprise , " he say . " such a thing never enter my mind for a moment . you would have do well to have confide in me before . " " i must ask your pardon for not have do so . " " as far as you be concern , " say affably , " i believe you to be hard-working and . your conduct since you have join the firm have be everything which i could desire . " bow his acknowledgment , much please by this preamble . " with regard to my ward , " continue the senior partner , speak very slowly and evidently weigh his word , " i could not wish her to have a good husband . in consider such a question i have , however , as you may imagine , to consult above everything else the wish of my dead friend , , the father of the young lady to whom you say that you be engage . a trust have be repose in me , and that trust must , of course , be fulfill to the letter . " " certainly , " say , wonder in his own mind how he could ever have bring himself for one moment to think evil of this kindly and righteous old man . " it be one of 's most clearly express wish that no word or even thought of such matter should be allow to come in his daughter 's way until she have attain maturity , by which he mean the age of . " " but he could not foresee the circumstance , " plead . " i be sure that a year or so will make no difference in her sentiment in this matter . " " my duty be to carry out his instruction to the letter . i wo n't say , however , " continue , " that circumstance might not arise which might induce me to shorten this probationary period . if my further acquaintance with you confirm the high impression which i now have of your commercial ability , that , of course , would have weight with me ; and , again , if i find 's mind be make up upon the point , that also would influence my judgment . " " and what be we to do in the mean time ? " ask the junior partner anxiously . " in the mean time neither you nor your people must write to her , or speak to her , or hold any communication with her whatever . if i find you or them do so , i shall be compel in justice to 's last request to send her to some establishment abroad where she shall be entirely out of your way . my mind be irrevocably make up upon that point . it be not a matter of personal inclination , but of conscience . " " and how long be this to last ? " cry . " it will depend upon . if you prove yourself to be a man of honour in this matter , i may be incline to sanction your address . in the mean time you must give me your word to let it rest , and neither to attempt to speak to , nor to see her , nor to allow your parent to communicate with her . the last condition may seem to you to be hard , but , in my eye , it be a very important one . unless you can bring yourself to promise all this , my duty will compel me to remove my ward entirely out of your reach , a course which would be painful to her and inconvenient to myself . " " but i must let her know of this arrangement . i must tell her that you hold out hope to us on condition that we keep apart for a time . " " it would be cruel not to allow you to do that , " answer . " you may send her one letter , but remember there shall be no reply to it . " " thank you , sir ; thank you ! " cry fervently . " i have something to live for now . this separation will but make our heart grow fond . what change can time make in either of us ? " " quite so , " say , with a smile . " remember there must be no more walking through the square . you must remain absolutely apart if you wish to gain my consent . " " it be hard , very , very hard . but i will promise to do it . what would i not promise which would lead to our early union ? " " that be settle then . in the mean time , i should be oblige if you would go down to the dock and look after the loading of the transferable corrugate iron house for . " " all right , sir , and thank you for your kindness , " say , bow himself out . he hardly know whether to be please or grieve over the result of his interview ; but , on the whole , satisfaction prevail , since at the bad it be but to wait for a year or so , while there seem to be some hope of gain the guardian 's consent before that . on the other hand , he have pledge himself to separate from ; but that would , he reflect , only make their the sweet . all the morning he be engage in superintend the stow of great slab of iron in the capacious hold of the of . when the hour of luncheon arrive no thought of food be in the lad 's head , but , bury himself in the back parlour of a little , he call for pen , ink , and paper , and proceed to indite a letter to his sweetheart . never be so much love and comfort and advice and hope compress into the limit of four sheet of paper or contain in the narrow boundary of a single envelope . read it over after he have finish , and feel that it feebly express his thought ; but , then , what lover ever yet do succeed in get his thought satisfactorily represent upon paper . have post this effusion , in which he have carefully explain the condition impose upon him , feel considerably more light-hearted , and return with renewed vigour to the loading of the corrugate iron . he would hardly have feel so satisfied have he see receive that same letter from the hand of the footman , and read it afterwards in the privacy of his bedroom with a sardonic smile upon his face . still less contented would he have be have he behold the merchant tear it into small fragment and make a bonfire of it in his capacious grate . next morning look in vain out of the accustomed window , and be sore at heart when no tall figure appear in sight and no friendly hand wave a morning salutation . this episode have occur about a fortnight before 's return from , and be duly retail to him by his father . " you need not be discourage by that , " he say . " i can always keep them apart , and if he be absent and you be as she have no idea of the cause of his will end by feeling slight and prefer you . " " i can understand how you ever come to let the matter go so far , " his son answer sullenly . " what do the young puppy want to come poach upon our preserve for ? the girl belong to us . she be give to you to look after , and a nice job you seem to have make of it ! " " never mind , my boy , " reply the merchant . " i will answer for keep them apart if you will only push the matter on your own account . " " i have say that i would do so , and i will , " return ; and event soon show that he be as good as his word . before his african excursion the relation between young and his father 's ward have never be cordial . 's nature , however , be so sweet and forgiving , that it be impossible for her to harbour any animosity , and she greet kindly on his return from his travel . within a few day she become conscious that a remarkable change have come over change , as it seem to her , very much for the well . in the past , week have frequently elapse without his address her , but now he go out of his way to make himself agreeable . sometimes he would sit for a whole evening describe to her all that he have see in , and really interest her by his account of man and thing . she , poor lass , hail this new departure with delight , and do all in her power to encourage his good nature and to show that she appreciate the alteration in his bearing . at the same time , she be rather puzzle in her mind , for an occasional flash of coarseness or ferocity show her that the real nature of the man be unalter , and that he be put an unnatural restraint upon himself . as the day go on , and no word or sign come from , a great fear and perplexity arise within the girl 's mind . she have hear nothing of the interview at , nor have she any clue at all which could explain the mystery . could it be that have inform her guardian of their engagement , and have receive such a rebuff that he have abandon her in despair ? that be surely impossible ; yet why be it that he have cease to walk through the square ? she know that he be not ill , because she hear her two companion talk of him in connection with business . what could be the matter , then ? her little heart be tear by a thousand conflicting doubt and fear . in the mean time give fresh manifestation of the improvement which travel have wrought upon him . she have remark one day that she be fond of moss rose . on come down to breakfast next morning she find a beautiful moss rise upon her plate , and every morning afterwards a fresh flower appear in the same place . this pretty little piece of courtesy , which she know could only come from , surprise and please her , for delicacy be the last quality for which she would have give him credit . on another occasion she have express a desire to read 's work , the book in the library be for the most part of last century . on enter her room that same evening she find , to her astonishment , a handsomely bind edition of the novel in question standing on the centre of her table . for a moment a wild , unreasoning hope awake in her that perhaps this be 's he have take this means of show that she be still dear to him . she soon see , however , that the book could only have come from the same source as the flower , and she marvel more than ever at this fresh proof of the good will of her companion . one day her guardian take the girl aside . " your life must be rather dull , " he say . " i have take a box for you at the opera . i do not care about such spectacle myself , but i have make arrangement for your escort . a change will do you good . " be too sad at heart to be incline for amusement . she endeavour , however , to look pleased and grateful . " my good friend , , be come for you , " the merchant say , " and be go too . he have a great liking for music . " could not help smile at this last remark , as she think how very successfully the young man have conceal his taste during the year that she have know him . she be ready , however , at the appoint hour , and , a prim old gentlewoman , who have chaperon on the rare occasion when she go out , have arrive , the three drive off together . the opera happen to be " faust , " and the magnificent scenery and dress astonish , who have hardly ever before be within the wall of a theatre . she sit as if entrance , with a bright tinge of colour upon her cheek , which , with her sparkling eye , make her look surpassingly beautiful . so think as he sit in the recess of the box and watch the varied expression which flit across her mobile feature . " she be well worth have , money or no , " he mutter to himself , and redouble his attention to her during the evening . an incident occur between the act that night which would have please the old merchant have he witness it . have be look down from the box , which be upon the third tier , at the sea of head beneath them . suddenly she give a start , and her face grow a trifle pale . " be n't that down there ? " she say to her companion . " where ? " ask , crane his neck . " oh yes , there he be , in the second row of the stall . " " do you know who the young lady be that he be talk to ? " ask . " i do n't know , " say . " i have see him about with her a good deal lately . " the latter be a deliberate falsehood , but see his chance of prejudice his rival , and take prompt advantage of it . " she be very good-looking , " he add presently , keep his eye upon his companion . " oh , indeed , " say , and turn with some remark to . her heart be sore nevertheless , and she derive little pleasure from the remainder of the performance . as to , in spite of his great love for music , he doze peacefully in a corner of the box during the whole of the last act . none of them be sorry when be duly consign to the nether region and be upon a couple of wooden cloud . narrate the incident of the recognition in the stall to his father on his return , and the old gentleman rub his hand over it . " most fortunate ! " he exclaim gleefully . " by work on that idea we might produce great effect . who be the girl , do you know ? " " some poor relation , i believe , whom he trot out at time . " " we will find out her name and all about her . , capital ! " cry ; and the two worthy depart to their room much please at this new card which chance have put into their hand . during the weary week while , in accordance with his promise , avoid and everything which could remind of his existence , continue to leave no stone unturned in his endeavour to steal his way into her affection . 's sole comfort be the recollection of that last passionate letter which he have write in the , and which have , as he imagine , enlighten her as to the reason of his absence , and have prevent her from feel any uneasiness or surprise . have he know the fate that have befall that epistle , he would hardly have be able to continue his office duty so patiently or to wait with so much resignation for 's sanction to his engagement . as the day pass and still bring no news , 's face grow pale and her heart more weary and despond . that the young man be well be beyond dispute , since she have see him with her own eye at the opera . what explanation could there be , then , for his conduct ? be it possible that he have tell of their engagement , and that her guardian have find some means of dissuade him from continue his some appeal to his interest , perhaps , which be too strong for his love . all that she know of 's nature contradict such a supposition . again , if have learn anything of their engagement , surely he would have reproach her with it . his manner of late have be kind rather than harsh . on the other hand , could it have chance that have meet this lady of the opera , and that her charm have prove too much for his constancy ? when she think of the honest grey eye which have look down into hers at that last meeting in the garden , she find it hard to imagine the possibility of such thing , and yet there be a fact which have to be explain . the more she think of it the more incomprehensible it grow , but still the pale face grow pale and the sad heart more heavy . soon , however , her doubt and fear begin to resolve themselves into something more substantial than vague conjecture . the conversation of the use to turn upon their business colleague , and always in the same strain . there be stray remark about his doing ; hint from the father and laughter from the son . " not much work to be get out of him now , " the old man would say . " when a man be in love he be not over fond of a ledger . " " a nice-looking girl , too , " say , in answer to some such remark . " i think something would come of it . we see them together at the opera , do n't we , ? " so they would gossip together , and every word a stab to the poor girl . she strive to conceal her feeling , and , indeed , her anger and her pride be strong even than her grief , for she feel that she have be cruelly use . one day she find alone and unbosom herself to him . " be it really true , " she ask , with a quick pant and a catch of her breath , " that be engage to be marry ? " " i believe so , my dear , " her guardian answer . " it be commonly report so . when a young lady and gentleman correspond it be usually a sign of something of the sort . " " oh , they correspond ? " " yes , they certainly correspond . her letter be send to him at the office . i do n't know that i altogether like that arrangement . it look as if he be deceive his parent . " all this be an unmitigated lie , but have go too far now to stick at trifle . " who be the lady ? " ask , with a calm set face but a quiver lip . " a cousin of his . be her name , i believe . i be not sorry , for it may be a sign that he have sow all his wild oat . do you know at one time , , i fear that he might take a fancy to you . he have a specious way with him , and i feel my responsibility in the matter . " " you need not be afraid on that score , " say bitterly . " i think i can gauge 's specious manner at its proper value . " with this valiant speech she march off , head in air , to her room , and there weep as though her very heart would break . tell his son of this scene as they walk home from that same day . " we must look sharp over it , " he say , " or that young fool may get impatient and upset our plan . " " it be not such an easy matter , " say his son gloomily . " i get along so far , but no further . it be a more uphill job than i expect . " " why , you have a bad enough name among woman , " the merchant say , with something approach to a sneer . " i have be grieve time out of number by your looseness in that respect . i should have think that you might have make your experience of some use now . " " there be woman and woman , " his son remark . " a girl like this take as much manage as a skittish horse . " " once get her into harness , and i warrant you will keep her there quiet enough . " " you bet , " say , with a loud laugh . " but at present she have the pull . her mind be still run on that fellow . " " she speak bitterly enough of him this morning . " " so she might , but she think of him none the less . if i could once make her thoroughly realize that he have throw her over i might catch her on the hop . she will marry for spite if she would n't for love . " " just so ; just so . wait a bit . that can be manage , i think , if you will leave it to me . " the old man brood over the problem all day , for from week to week the necessity for the money be become more pressing , and that money could only be hope for through the success of 's wooing . no wonder that every little detail which might sway the balance one way or the other be anxiously ponder over by the head of the firm , and that even the fluctuation in oil and ivory become secondary to this great object . next day , immediately after they have sit down to dinner , some letter be hand in by the footman . " forward on from the office , sir , " say the flunkey . " the clerk say that be away and that he do not like to open them . " " just like him ! " say , peevishly push back his plate of soup . " i hate do business out of hour . " he tear the envelope off the various letter as he speak . " what be this ? cask return as per invoice ; that be all right . note from & can be answer . memorandum on the duty at . hallo ! what have we here ? ' my darling be this ever , . ' why , it be one of young 's love-letter which have get mix up with my business paper . ! ! i must really apologize to him for have open it , but he must take his chance of that , if he have his correspondence send to the office . i take it for grant that everything there be a business communication . " 's face grow very white as she listen . she eat little dinner that day , poor child , and take the early opportunity of retire to her room . " you do that uncommonly well , dad , " say approvingly , after she be go . " it hit her hard , i could see that . " " i think it touch her pride . people should not have pride . we be warn against it . now , that same pride of hers will forbid her ever think of that young man again . " " and you have the letter write ? " " i write it myself . i think , in such a case , any stratagem be justifiable . such large interest be at stake that we must adopt strong measure . i quite agree with the old that the end occasionally justify the mean . " " , dad ; very good ! " cry , chew his toothpick . " i like to hear you argue . it be quite refresh . " " i act accord to the light which be vouchsafe me , " say gravely ; on which lean back in his chair and laugh heartily . the very next morning the merchant speak to on the matter , for he have observe sign of impatience in the young man , and fear that some sudden impulse might lead him to break his promise and so upset everything . " take a seat . i should like to have a word with you , " he say graciously , when his junior partner appear before him to consult with him as to the duty of the day . sit down with hope in his heart . " it be only fair to you , , " say , in a kindly voice , " that i should express to you my appreciation of your honourable conduct . you have keep your promise in regard to in the full manner . " " of course i keep my promise , " say bluntly . " i trust , however , that you will soon see your way to withdraw your prohibition . it have be a hard trial to me . " " i have insist upon it because it seem to me to be my duty . every one take his own view upon such point , and it have always be my custom throughout life to take what some might think a stringent one . it appear to me that i owe it to my deceased friend to prevent his daughter , whom he have confide to me , from make any mistake . as i say before , if you continue to show that you be worthy of her , i may think more favourably of it . exemplary as your conduct have be since you join us , i believe that i be not wrong in state that you be a little wild when you be at . " " i never do anything that i be ashamed of , " say . " very likely not , " answer , with an irrepressible sneer . " the question be , do you do anything that your father be ashamed of ? " " certainly not , " cry hotly . " i be no milksop or psalm singer , but there be nothing that i ever do there of which i should be ashamed of my father know . " " do n't speak lightly of psalm singing . it be a good practice in its way , and you would have be none the bad have you indulge in it perhaps . however , that be neither here nor there . what i want you clearly to understand be that my ultimate consent to your union depend entirely upon your own conduct . above all , i insist that you refrain from unsettle the girl 's mind at present . " " i have already promise . hard as the struggle may be , i shall not break my word . i have the consolation of know that if we be separate for twenty year we should still be true to one another . " " that be very satisfactory , " say the merchant grimly . " nevertheless it be a weary , weary time . if i could only write a -- " " not a word , " interrupt . " it be only because i trust you that i keep her in at all . if i think there be a possibility of your do such a thing i should remove her at once . " " i shall do nothing without your permission , " say , take up his hat to go . he pause with his hand upon the door . " if ever it seem good to me , " he say , " i consider that by give you due notice i absolve myself from my promise . " " you would not do anything so foolish . " " still i reserve myself the right of do so , " say , and go off with a heavy heart to his day 's work . " everything be clear for you now , " the old man say to his son triumphantly . " there be no chance of interference , and the girl be in the very humour to be win . i flatter myself that it have be manage with tact . remember that all be at stake , and go in and win . " " i shall go in , " say " and i think the chance be that i shall win too . " at which reassuring speech the old man laugh , and slap his son approvingly upon the shoulder . in spite of 's temporary satisfaction and the stoical face which he present to the world , it be probable that in the whole of there be no more unhappy and man . the long fight against impending misfortune have shatter his iron constitution and weaken him both in body and in mind . it be remark upon ' change how much he have age of late , and moralist comment upon the vanity and inefficacy of the wealth which could not smooth the wrinkle from the great trader 's haggard visage . he be surprise himself when he look in the glass at the change which have come over him . " never mind , " he would say in his dogged heart a hundred time a day , " they ca n't beat me . do what they will , they ca n't beat me . " this be the one thought which sustain and console him . the preservation of his commercial credit have become the aim and object of his life , to which there be nothing that he be not prepare to sacrifice . his cunningly devise speculation in diamond have fail , but this failure have be due to an accident which could neither have be foresee nor remedy . to carry out this scheme he have , as we have see , be oblige to borrow money , which have now to be repay . this he have manage to do , more or less completely , by the sale of the stone which have bring home , supplement by the recent profit of the firm . there be still the original deficit to be face , and know that though a settlement might be postpone from month to month , still the day must come , and come soon , when his debt must be meet , or his inability to meet them become apparent to the whole world . should be successful in his wooing and his ward 's forty thousand pound be throw into the scale , the firm would shake itself clear from the load which oppress it . suppose , however , that be to refuse his son . what be to occur then ? the will be so word that there appear to be no other way of obtain the money . a very vulpine look would come over the old man 's face as he brood over that problem . the strange of all the phenomenon , however , present by at this period of his life be his own entire conviction of the righteousness of his action . when every night and morning he sink upon his knee with his household and pray for the success of the firm 's undertaking , no qualm of conscience ever trouble him as to their intrinsic morality . on the grey head of the merchant in the first pew be as constant an object as be the pew itself , yet in that head no thought ever rise of the inconsistency of his religion and of his practice . for fifty year he have be persuade himself that he be a righteous man , and the conviction be now so firmly impress upon his very soul that nothing could ever shake it . be wrong when he set this down as deliberate hypocrisy . blind strength of will and be at the bottom of his action , but he would have be astonish and indignant have he be accuse of simulate piety or of use it as a tool . to him the firm of be the very representation of religion in the commercial world , and as such must be uphold by every conceivable mean . to his son this state of mind be unintelligible , and he simply give his father credit for be a consummate and accomplished hypocrite , who find a mantle of piety a very convenient one under which to conceal his real character . he have himself inherit the old man 's dogged pertinacity and commercial instinct , and be by nature unscrupulous and impatient of any obstacle place in his way . he be now keenly alive to the fact that the existence of the firm depend upon the success of his suit , and he know also how lucrative a concern the african business would prove be it set upon its leg again . he have determine in case he succeed to put his father aside as a sleep partner and to take the rein of management entirely into his own hand . his practical mind have already devise countless way in which the profit might be increase . the first step of all , then , be the gain possession of the forty thousand pound , and to that he devote himself heart and soul . when two such man work together for one end , it be seldom that they fail to achieve it . it would be a mistake to suppose that feel himself in any degree in love at this time . he recognize his companion 's sweetness and gentleness , but these be not quality which appeal to his admiration . 's amiable , quiet way seem insipid to a man who be use to female society of a very different order . " she have no go or snap about her , " he would complain to his father . " she be not like at the , or . " " forbid ! " ejaculate the merchant . " that sort of thing be bad enough out of door , but bad of all in your own house . " " it make court a good deal easy , " answer . " if a girl will answer up and give you an opening now and then , it make all the difference . " " you ca n't write poetry , can you ? " " not much , " say with a grin . " that be a pity . i believe it go a long way with woman . you might get some one to write some , and let her think it be yours . or you could learn a little off and repeat it . " " yes , i might do that . i be go to buy a collar for that beast of a dog of hers . all the time that i be talk to her yesterday she be so take up with it that i do n't believe she hear half that i say . my finger itch to catch it up and chuck it through the window . " " do n't forget yourself , my boy , do n't forget yourself ! " cry the merchant . " a single false step might ruin every thing . " " never fear , " say confidently , and go off upon the dog-collar mission . while he be in the shop he buy a as well , which he lock up in his drawer to use as the occasion serve . during all this time have be entirely unconscious of her companion 's intention and design . she have be associate with for so many year , and have meet such want of courtesy from him , that the idea of his present himself as a suitor never come into her head . she hail his charge of demeanour , therefore , as be the result of his large experience of the world , and often wonder how it be that he have profit so much by his short stay at the . in the cheerless house it be pleasant to have at least one companion who seem to have kindly feeling towards her . she be only too glad , therefore , to encourage his advance , and to thank him with sweet smile and eloquent eye for what appear to her to be his disinterested kindness . after a while , however , 's attention become so marked that it be impossible for her to misunderstand them any longer . not only do he neglect his usual work in order to hang round her from morning to night , but he pay her many clumsy compliment and give other similar indication of the state of his affection . as soon as this astound fact have be fairly realize by the girl , she at once change her manner and become formal and distant . , nothing daunt , redouble his tender word and glance , and once would have kiss her hand have she not rapidly withdraw it . on this shut herself up in her room , and rarely come out save when the other be away in the . she be determine that there should be no possibility of any misunderstanding as to her feeling in the matter . have be watch these little skirmish closely and with keen interest . when take to immure herself in her room he feel that it be time for him to interfere . " you must go about a little more , and have more fresh air , " he say to her one day , when they be alone after breakfast . " you will lose your rose if you do n't . " " i be sure i do n't care whether i lose them or not , " answer his ward listlessly . " you may not , but there be other who do , " remark the merchant . " i believe it would break 's heart . " flush up at this sudden turn of the conversation . " i do n't see what reason your son have to care about it , " she say . " care about it ! be you so blind that you do n't see that he love the very ground you walk on . he have grow quite pale and ill these last few day because he have not see you , and he imagine that he may have offend you . " " for goodness ' sake ! " cry earnestly , " persuade him to think of some one else . it will only be painful both to him and to me if he keep on this way . it can possibly lead to anything . " " and why not ? why -- " " oh , do n't let us argue about it , " she cry passionately . " the very idea be horrible . it wo n't bear talk about . " " but why , my dear , why ? you be really too impulsive . have his fault , but what man have not ? he have be a little wild in his youth , but he be settle down now into an excellent man of business . i assure you that , young as he be , there be few name more respected on ' . the way in which he manage the business of the firm in be wonderful . he be already a rich man , and will be rich before he die . i can see any cause for this deep-rooted objection of yours . as to look he be , you must confess , as fine a young fellow as there be in . " " i wish you not to speak of it or think of it again , " say . " my mind be entirely make up when i say that i shall never marry any least of all . " " you will think good of it , i be sure , " her guardian say , pat her chestnut hair kindly as he stand over her . " since your poor father hand you over to me i have guard you and care for you to the good of my ability . many a sleepless night i have spend think of your future and endeavour to plan it out so as to secure your happiness . i should not be likely to give you bad advice now , or urge you to take a step which would make you unhappy . have you anything to complain of in my treatment of you ? " " you have be always very just , " say with a sob . " and this be how you repay me ! you be go to break my son 's heart , and through his mine . he be my only boy , and if anything go wrong with him i tell you that it would bring my grey hair in sorrow to the grave . you have it in your power to do this , or , on the other hand , you may make my old age a happy one by the knowledge that the lad be mate with a good woman , and have attain the object on which his whole mind and heart be set . " " oh , i ca n't , i ca n't . do let the matter drop . " " think it over , " the old man say . " look at it from every point of view . remember that the love of an honest man be not to be lightly spurn . i be naturally anxious about it , for my future happiness , as well as his , depend upon your decision . " be fairly satisfy with this interview . it seem to him that his ward be rather less decide in her refusal at the end of it , and that his word have have some effect upon her , which might possibly increase with reflection . " give her a little time now , " be his advice to his son . " i think she will come round , but she need manage . " " if i could get the money without take her it would be good for me , " say with an oath . " and well for her too , " remark grimly . one day be sit at the window of his little room smoke his cigarette and sip his glass of wine , as be his custom if time be reasonably good . while thus agreeably employ he chance to look across the road and perceive a little fringe of dark hair , and a still dark eye , which survey him round the border of one of the curtain which flank a window opposite . the gallant major be much interested in this apparition , and rise to make a close inspection of it , but , alas ! before he could focus it with his eye-glass it be go ! he bend his gaze resolutely in that direction for a long time , and smoke at least half a dozen cigarette , besides finish the bottle of wine ; but although he think he see certain and of garment in the dark background of the opposite room , he could not make out anything more definite . next day the soldier be on the look-out at the same hour , and be reward by the appearance of two eye , very mischievous and dangerous one too , which be set in a buxom and by no means unprepossess face . the lady who own these charm look very deliberately up the street , and very deliberately down the street , after which she bethink herself to look across the street , and start to perceive a stout , middle-aged gentleman , with a fiery face , who be look at her with an expression of intense admiration . so much alarm be she that she vanish behind the curtain and the major fear that he would see her no more . fortunately , however , it become evident that the lady 's alarm be not very overpowering , for within five minute she be back at the window , where her eye again fall upon the beaming face and jaunty figure of the major , who have pose himself in a striking attitude , which be somewhat mar by the fact that he be still envelop in his purple dressing-gown . this time her eye linger a little longer than before and the suspicion of a smile appear upon her feature . on this the major smile and bow , and she smile also , show a pretty little line of white tooth as she do so . what the veteran 's next move might have be no one can tell , for the lady solve the problem by disappear , and this time permanently . he be very well satisfy , however , and chuckle much to himself while array himself in his long frock coat and immaculate collar before set out for the club . he have be a sly old dog in his day , and have follow almost as much as he have during his chequer career . all day the recollection of this little episode haunt him . so much be he at the club that he actually play out the thirteenth trump upon his partner 's long suit and so sacrifice the the first and only time that he be ever know to throw away a point . he tell all about it when he come back . " she be a woman , whoever she may be , " he remark , at they sit together before turn in . " be ! she be the woman i have see for a long time . " " she be a window , " say the german . " a what ? " " a window of an engineer . " " be it a widow you mane ? what know about her ? what be her name , and where do she come from ? " " i have hear from the slavey that a widow life over in those room . she board mit madame , and that window belong to her privacy be , chamber . as to her name , i have not hear it , or else i disremember it . " " ! " say the major , " she have eye that look right through , and a figure like . " " she be if she be a be , forty , " remark . " well , if she be , me boy , a woman of forty be just in the o ' . if you have see her at the window , she would have take by storm . she stand like this , and she look up like this , and then down in this way . " the major purse up his warlike feature into what he imagine to be an innocent and captivating expression . then she look across and see me , and down go the lid of her eye , like the shut off of a bull's-eye lantern . then she blush and steal just one more glance at me round the corner of the curtain . she have two peep , the a doubt of it . " " be very good , " the german say encouragingly . " ah , me boy , year ago , when i be forty inch round the chest and thirty-three round the waist , i be worth look at twice . , when a man get and lonely he see what a fool he be not to make good use of his time when he have the chance . " " ! " cry . " you do n't mean to say that you would marry suppose you have the chance ? " " i do n't know , " the major answer reflectively . " the be not to be trust , " the german say sadly . " i know a in my own country which be the daughter of a man keep a she and i be promise to be marry to each other . , he be to be vat you call my good man . a very handsome man be karl , and i send him often mit little present of one thing or another to my girl , for there be reason why i could not go myself . he be nice than me because my hair be red , and pretty soon she begin to like him , and he like her too . so the day before the she go down the to by the boat , and he go down by train , and there they meet and be marry the one to the other . " " and what do you do ? " the major ask with interest . " ah , be the most worst thing of all , for i follow them mit a friend of mine , and when we catch them i do not let her know , but i call him out of his hotel , and i tell him that he must fight me . a mistake . i should have do him an insult , and then he have have to ask me to fight , and i could have choose my own . as it be he choose sword , for he know veil that i know nothing of them , and he have be the good fencer in the whole of his . then we meet in the morning , and before i have time to do anything he run me through the left lung . i have show you the mark of it . after i vas in bed for two month and more , and it still hurt me be cold . that be vat they call satisfaction , " add , pull his long red beard reflectively . " to me it have ever seem the most thing that could be imagine . " " i do n't wonder you be afraid of the woman after that , " say the major , laughing . " there be plenty of good woman in the world , though , if you have the luck to come across them . know a young fellow call -- ? ah , you would n't , but i have meet him lately at the club . he have get a girl who be the adopt daughter of that same that we talk about . i see the two of them one day as happy as a pair of young love bird . sure , you have only get to look at her face to see that she be as good as gold . i will bet that that woman over the there be another of the right sort . " " be in your head , " the german say , with a smile . " you shall certainly dream about her . i remember a in -- " and so these two ramble on into the small hour , discourse upon their past experience and regale each other with many reminiscence , some of which , perhaps , be just as well omit and allow to sink into oblivion . when the major finally retire for the night , his last thought be of the lady at the window and of the means by which he might contrive to learn something of her . these prove to be more easy than he anticipate , for next morning , on cross-examine the little servant girl from whom have derive his information , the major find out all that he desire to know . accord to this authority , the lady be a widow of the name of , the relict of a deceased engineer , and have be stay some little time at 's , which be the rival establishment to that in which the major and reside . arm with this information , the major ponder for some time before decide upon his course of action . he see no possible means by which he could gain an introduction to his charming neighbour unless he have recourse to some daring strategem . " " have always be the soldier 's motto . he rise from his chair , discard his purple gown , and array himself in his good attire . have he pay such attention to his toilet . his face be clean shaven and shine , his sparse hair be lay out to the good advantage , his collar spotless , his frock coat oppressively respectable , and his tout ensemble irreproachable . " be ! " he say to himself , as he survey himself in the small lodging-house glass , " i will look as young as if i have some more hair on me head . bad cess to the helmet and that wear it all off . " when his toilet be fully complete and round off by the addition of a pair of light glove and an ebony stick with a silver head , the veteran stride forth with a bold front , but with considerable trepidation at his heart ; for when be a man so seasoned as to have no misgiving when he make the first advance to a woman who really attract him ? whatever the major 's inward feeling may have be , however , he successfully conceal them as he ring the bell of the rival lodging-house and inquire of the servant whether be at home . " yes , sir , she be , " say the slavey , with a frightened bob , which be a tribute to the major 's martial mien and gorgeous attire . " would you tell her that i should like to see her , " say the major boldly . " i n't detain her a moment . here be my , late of the . " the servant disappear with the card , and presently return with a request that he would step up . the old soldier stump his way upstairs with the firm footfall of one who have take a thing in hand and mean to carry it through at all hazard . as he ascend , it seem to him that he hear the sound of feminine laughter in the distance . if so , it could hardly have come from the lady whom he be in quest of , for he be show into a large and room , where she sit look demure and grave enough , as do another young lady who be crochet on the ottoman beside her . the major make his most courtly bow , though he feel very much as the spaniard may be suppose to have do when they see their ship blaze behind them . " i trust you will excuse this intrusion on my part , " he begin . " i happen to hear that a lady of the name of be stop here . " " my name be , sir , " say the lady , whose dark eye have allure the major to this feat of daring . " then perhaps , madam , " the veteran say with another bow , " you will allow me to ask you whether you be any relation to , of the ? " " pray take a seat , , " say , refer to his card , which she still hold in her very little hand . " major-general , do you say ? dear me ! i know that one of my husband 's relation go into the army , but we never hear what become of him . a major-general , be he ? whoever would have think it ! " " as dash a , madam , " say the major , warming into eloquence , " as ever hew a way through the rank of the enemy , or storm the snow-clad pass of the himalayas . " " fancy ! " ejaculate the young lady with the crochet needle . " many a time , " continue the soldier , " he and i after some hard-fought battle have sleep upon the blood-stained ground wrap in the same martial cloak . " " fancy ! " cry both lady in chorus ; and they could not have select a more appropriate interjection . " and when at last he die , " the major go on with emotion , " cut in two with a in a skirmish with hill tribe , he turn to -- " " after be cut in two ? " interrupt the young lady . " he turn to me , " say the major inflexibly , " and put his hand in mine , he say , with his last breath , ' be what he always call , ' he say , ' i have -- ' your husband be his brother , i think you say , ma'am ? " " no , it be 's uncle who go into the army . " " ah , quite so . ' i have a nephew in , ' he say , ' who be very dear to me . he be marry to a charming woman . search out the young couple , . over them . them ! ' those be his last word , madam . next moment his have flee . when i hear your name casually i could not feel satisfied in me mind until i have come across and ascertain if you be the lady in question . " now , this narrative not only surprise the widow , which be not unnatural , see that it be entirely an invention of the old soldier be , but it appeal to her weak point . the father of the deceased have be of plebeian origin , so that the discovery in the family of a real he be a famous windfall , for the widow have social ambition which hitherto she have never be able to gratify . hence she smile sweetly at the veteran in a way which stimulate him to further flight of mendacity . " sure he and i be like brother , " he say . " he be a man that any one might well be proud to know . commander-in-chief say to me once , ' , ' say he , ' i do n't know what we will do if we have a european war . i have no one i can rely on , ' say he . ' there be , ' say ' , ' say he , ' would be our man . ' he be terribly cut up when this occur . ' here be a blow to the british army ! ' he remark , as he look down at him where he lie with a bullet through his do , madam , be ! " " but , major , i understand you to say that he be cut in two ? " " so he be . cut in two , and shot and mortally wound in a dozen place besides . ah , if he could have foresee that i should have meet you he would have die happy . " " it be strange he never let us know of his existence when he be alive , " the widow remark . " pride , madam , pride ! ' until i reach the top of the tree , , ' he use to say , ' i shall reveal myself to me brother . ' " " , " interpolate the widow . " quite -- ' i shall reveal myself to me nephew . ' he say those very word to me only a few minute before the fatal shell strike him . " " a shell , major ? you mean a bullet . " " a shell , madam , a shell , " say the major with decision . " dear me ! " exclaim , with a somewhat bewilder expression . " how very sad it all be . we must thank you very much , -- " " , " say the . " i beg pardon , . it be very kind of you to call upon us in this friendly way and to give us these detail . of course , when a relative die , even though you do n't know much about him , still it be interesting to have a clear account of how it all happen . just fancy , , " continue the widow , draw her handkerchief from her reticule and mop one of her eye with it . " just fancy the poor fellow be cut in two with a bullet far away in and him just speak about and me a few minute before . i be sure we must thank major -- " " , madam , " cry the major with some indignation . " i really beg pardon . we must thank him , , for have tell us about it and for have call . " " do not thank me , me dear , " say the major , clear his throat and wave his stubby hand deprecatingly . " i have already have me reward in have the pleasure and honour of make your acquaintance and of come near to those which i have admire from a distance . " " oh , auntie , listen to that ! " cry , and both lady giggle . " not forget yours , -- " " , " say . " my brother 's daughter . " " not forget your , , " continue the major , with a bow and a flourish . " to a lonely man like , the very sight of a lady be like dew to a plant . i feel , madam , vitalize , invigorate . " the major puff out his chest and look tender over his high white collar . " the chief object of me visit , " the old soldier say after a pause , " be to learn whether i could be of any assistance to you in any way . your sad bereavement , of which i have hear , it may be that even a comparative stranger may be of service in business matter . " " i be sure it be very kind of you , major , " the widow answer . " since poor die everything have be in disorder . if it would n't trouble you , i should very much like your advice on some future occasion . i will ask your opinion when i have clear up thing a little myself . as to these lawyer , they think of their own interest , not of yours . " " quite so , " say the major sympathetically . " there be the fifteen hundred of poor 's insurance . that be not lay out yet . " " fifteen hundred ! " say the major . " that be pound a year at five per . " " i can get good interest than that , " say the widow gaily . " i have get two thousand lay out at seven per cent . -- n't i , ? " " safe , too , " say the girl . " the deuce you have ! " think the major . " so , when we be make arrangement , i will ask your assistance and advice , . i know that we poor woman be very bad at business . " " i shall look forward to the day , " say the major gallantly , rise and take up his hat . he be very well satisfy with his little ruse and his success in break the ice . " be ! " he remark to that evening , " she have get money as well as her look . it be a lucky man that git her . " " i bet you ask her for to marry you , " say with a smile . " i will bet that she refuse me if i do , " answer the major despondently , in spite of which he retire that night feel considerably more elate than on the preceding evening . have be smile upon the of late . ever since the major 's successful visit to he have be able to live in a state of luxury to which he have long be unaccustomed . his uncle , the earl , too , have condescend to think of his humble relative , and have make a small provision for him , which , with his other resource , remove all anxiety as to the future . have his fair share in this sudden accession of prosperity . the have resume his situation as commercial clerk and foreign correspondent to & , so that his circumstance have also improve . the pair have even have some conversation as to the expediency of migrate into large and more expensive lodging , but the major 's increase intimacy with his fair neighbour opposite stand in the way of a change . in any case , they be loth to leave their fourth floor , and to have the trouble of move their effect . these same effect be the pride of 's heart . small as their sanctum be , it be a very museum of curious object bring from every part of the world , most of them of little intrinsic value , but all possess a charm of association to their owner . they be his trophy of travel , battle , and the chase . from the bison rug and tiger skin upon the floor to the great sumatran bat which hang head downwards , as in the day of its earthly existence , from the ceiling , there be not an object but have its own special history . in one corner be an afghan matchlock , and a bundle of spear from the southern sea ; in another a carve indian paddle , a assegai , and an american blowpipe , with its little sheaf of poison arrow . here be a hookah , richly mount , and with all due accessory , just as it be present to the major twenty year before by a chieftain , and there be a high mexican saddle on which he have ride through the land of the . there be not a square foot of the wall which be not adorn by knife , javelin , malay , chinese opium pipe , and such other trifle as old traveller gather round them . by the side of the fire rest the campaigner 's straight regulation sword in its dim the dimmer because the companion occasionally use it as a poker when that instrument happen to be miss . " it be not the value of , " the major remark , glance round the apartment , " but , , there be not one of the lot that have not get a story tack on to it . look at that bear 's head now , that be grin at from over the door . that be a bear , not much big than a dog , but as fierce as a grizzly . that be the very one that claw , of the . , he will have be do for if i have n't get me to bear on him . ' man i duck ! ' i cry , for they be so mix that i could n't tell one from the other . he put his head down , and i catch the brute right between the eye . can see the track of the bullet on the bone . " the major pause , and the pair smoke meditatively , for have return from the , and the twilight be fall and everything conduce to tobacco and reverie . " see that necklace of cowrie shell hang beside it , " continue the veteran , wave his cigarette in that direction ; " that come from the neck of a black , be ! we be trek up country before the second war . make an not send a trusty man to tell her . he be find next day with twenty assegai in his body . she be a decoy duck , , and the whole thing a plant . " " ! " ejaculate . " what a life you have lead ! i have live with you now many month and hear you tell many tale , but ever there be fresh one . " " yes , a strange life , " answer the major , stretch out his leg and gaze up at the ceiling . i think to be strand in me age . if i have n't commute i will have have a fair , but i draw me money in a lump sum , and go to to break the bank . instead o ' that the bank break me , and yet i believe me system be correct enough , and i must have win if i have have more capital . " " there be many say , " grunt doubtfully . " i believe it for all that , " the major continued . " why , man , i be always the lucky chap at card . i on me skill principally , but still i have luck as well . i once be becalmed for a fortnight in the of in a small transport . and i try to kill time by play nap , and we have the stake low enough at first , but they soon grow high , for he keep try to cover his loss . before the of the two week i clear out of him nearly all he have in the world . ' look here , , ' he say at last , look mighty white about the gill , ' this ship that we be in be more than half mine . i be chief owner . i will stake me share of the ship on the next game against all that i have lose . ' ' ! ' say i , and shuffle , cut , and deal . he go four on three high trump , and an ace , and i hold four small trump . ' it be a bad job for my creditor , ' he say , as he throw his hand down . ! i start on that a poor captain , and i come into port very fairly well off , and sail in me own ship , too ! what think of that ? " " ! " ejaculate the german . " and the captain ? " " brandy , and delirium , " the major say , between the puff of his cigarette . " jump overboard off , on the homeward . shocking thing , you lose . " " ! and those two knife upon the wall , the straight one and the one with the crook ; be there a history about them ? " " an incident , " the major answer languidly . " curious , but true . see it . in the afghan war i be convoy supply through the pass , when we be set upon by , , and robber . i have fifty man of the 27th native infantry under me , with a sergeant . among the be a thumping big chief , who stand among the rock with that very knife in his hand , the long one , shout insult at our fellow . our sergeant be a smart little nigger , and this cheek set his blood up . be ! he chuck his gun down , pull out that curve knife it make for the big . both side stop fire to see the two chap fight . as our fellow come scramble up over the rock , the chief run at him and thrust with all his . be ! i think i see the pint of the blade come out through the sergeant 's back . he manage to twist round though , so as to dodge it . at the same time he hit up from below , and the spring into the air , look for all the world like one o ' those open sheep you see outside a butcher 's shop . he be rip up from stomach to throat . the sight knock all the fight out of the other spalpeen , and they take to their heel as hard as they could run . i take the dead man 's knife away , and the sergeant sell me his for a few rupee , so there they be . not much to make a story of , but it be to see . i will have bet five to three on the chief . " " bad discipline , very bad , " remark . " to break the rank and run mit knife would make my old very mad indeed . " the have serve his time in the prussian army , and be still mindful of his training . " your stiff-backed would have have a poor chance in the pass , " answer the major . " it be man for himself there . you might lie , or stand , or do what you like as long as you do n't run . discipline go to piece in a war of that sort . " " be what you call gorilla warfare , " say , with a proud consciousness of have master an english idiom . " for all , discipline be a very fine good indeed . i remember in the great war with have make a mine and be about to fire it . a sentry have be place just over this , and after the match be light it be forget to withdraw the man . he know well that the powder beneath him would presently him into the air lift , but since he have not be dismiss in right form he remain until the have explode . he be never see no more , and , indeed , he have ever be might well have be forget , have it not be his be find . be a proper soldier , i think , to be place in command have he live . " " to be place in a lunatic asylum if he live , " say the irishman testily . " , what be this ? " the " this " be the appearance of the boarding-house slavey with a very neat pink envelope upon a tray , address , in the most elegant of female hand , to " , late of her 's and . " " ah ! " cry , laugh in his red beard , " it be from a woman . you be what the english call a sly hog , a very sly , i should say , dog , though it be much the same . " " it be for you as well as for me . see here . ' her compliment to and to his friend , , and trust that they may be able to favour her with their company on evening at eight , to meet a few . ' it be a dance , " say the major . " that account for the harp and the table and and wine case i see go in this morning . " " will you go ? " " yes , of course i will , and so shall you . we will well answer it . " so in due course an acceptance be send across to 's hospitable invitation . never be there such a brush and scrub in the bedroom of a couple of quiet bachelor as occur some two evening afterwards in the top story of ' establishment . the major 's suit have be pursue unremittingly since his first daring advance upon the widow , but under many difficulty and discouragement . in the occasional chance interview which he have with his attractive neighbour he become more and more enamoured , but he have no opportunity of ascertain whether the feeling be mutual . this invitation appear to promise him the very chance which he desire , and many be the stern resolution which he form as he stand in front of his toilet-table and arrange his tie and his shirt front to his satisfaction . , who be array in a dress coat of antiquated shape , and very shiny about the joint , sit on the side of the bed , eye his companion 's irreproachable get-up with envy and admiration . " it fit you beautiful , " he say , allude to the coat . " it come from 's , " answer the major carelessly . " as for me , " say , " i have never use mine in at all . truly , as you know , i hate all dance and dinner . i come with you , however , very willingly , for i would not for nothing in the world give offence to the of my comrade . since i go , i shall go as a gentleman should . " he look down as he speak with much satisfaction at his wither suit of black . " but , me good fellow , " cry the major , who have now complete his toilet , " you have get your tie under your lift ear . it look very quaint and there , but still it be not quite the place for it . you look as if you be ticket for sale . " " they n't see it unless i put it out from under my beard , " the german say apologetically . " however , if you think it should be hide , it shall be so . how be my ? you have them of gold , i see , but mine be of . " " mother-of-pearl , " say the major , laughing . " they will do very well . there be the of a lot of cab at their door , " he continue , peer round the corner of the blind . " the room be all light up , and i can hear them tune the instrument . maybe we will well go across . " " , then ! " say resolutely ; and the two set off , the major with a fix determination that he should know his fate before the evening be over . never in the whole history of 's boarding establishment have such festive preparation be know . the landlady herself have enter heart and soul into the business , and as all the boarder have receive invitation for themselves and their friend , they co-operate in every possible manner to make the evening a success . the large drawing-room have be clear and the floor wax . this process leave it in a very glassy and orthodox condition , as the cook discover when , on bustle in , the back of her cranium come in violent contact with the board , while her body describe a with a velocity which completely eclipse any subsequent feat of agility show by the dancer in the evening . the saloon have be very tastefully lay out as a , and numerous other little chamber be throw open and brighten up to serve as lounge place for those who be fatigue . in the parlour there be two , and every other convenience for any who prefer sedentary amusement . altogether both and the boarder , in solemn conclave assemble , agree that the thing look very promising , and that it would be a credit to the establishment . the guest be as vary as the wine , though hardly as select . 's exuberant hospitality include , as already intimate , not only her own friend , but those of her , so that from an early hour the room begin to fill , and by nine o'clock there be hardly space for the dancer . hansom and growler rattle up in a continuous stream and discharge their burden . there be a carpet down from the kerb to the head of the lodging-house step , " like , " as the cook express it , and the greengrocer 's man in the hall look so pompous and inflated in his gorgeous attire that his own cabbage would hardly have recognize him . his main defect as a footman be that he be somewhat hard of hearing , and have a marvellous faculty of misinterpret whatever be say to him , which occasionally lead to remarkable result . thus , when he announce the sport under the title of luck , it be feel that he be rather too near the truth to be pleasant . indeed , the company have hardly recover from the confusion produce by this small incident when the two make their appearance . , who be tastefully array in black satin and lace , stand near the door of the drawing-room , and look very charming and captivating as she fulfill her duty as hostess . so think the major as he approach her and shake her hand , with some well turn compliment upon his lip . " let me me friend , , " he add . smile upon the german in a way that win his teutonic heart . " you will find programme over there , " she explain . " i think the first be a round dance . no , thank you , major ; i shall stand out , or there will be no one to receive the people . " she hurry away to greet a party of new arrival , while the major and wander off in search of partner . there be no want of spirit or of variety in the dancing at 's . from , the exciseman , who dance the original old-fashioned , to young , of the , who station himself immediately underneath the central chandelier , and spin rapidly round with his partner upon his own axis , like a couple of beetle impale upon a single pin , every possible variation of the art of waltz be to be observe . there be , of the , rotate round with , their face wear that pained and anxious expression which the british countenance naturally assume when dancing , give the impression that the leg have suddenly burst forth in a festive mood , and have drag the rest of the body into it very much against its will . there be the major too , who have succeed in obtain as a partner , and be dance as old soldier can dance , thread his way through the crowded room with the ease beget by the experience of a lifetime . meanwhile , at the other end , be flounder about with a broad smile upon his face and an elderly lady tuck under his right arm , while he hold her disengage hand straight out at right angle , as if she have be a banjo . in short , the fun be fast and furious , and waltz follow polka and mazurka follow waltz with a rapidity which weed out the weak vessel among the dancer and test the stamina of the musician . then there be the , whither the and the major and many other of the elder repair when they find the pace too fast for them . very snug and comfortable it be , with its square table , each with a fringe of chair , and the clean shine card spread out over their green baize surface . the major and his hostess play against and an old gentleman who come from , with the result that the gallant captain and his partner rise up poor and sad man , which be rather a blow to the former , who reckon upon clear a little on such occasion , and have not expect to find himself oppose by such a past master of the art as the major . then the veteran and another play the hostess and another lady , and the cunning old dog manage to lose in such a natural manner , and to pay up with such a good grace , and with so many pretty speech and compliment , that the widow 's partner be visibly impress , a fact which , curiously enough , seem to be anything but agreeable to the widow . after that they all file off to supper , where they find the dancer already in possession , and there be much crush and crowd , which tend to do away with ceremony and to promote the harmony of the evening . if the major have contrive to win favour from in the early part of the evening , he manage now to increase any advantage he have gain . in the first place he inquire in a very loud voice of , at the other end of the table , whether that gentleman have ever meet the deceased , and be answer in the negative , he descant fluently upon the merit of that imaginary warrior . after this unscrupulous manoeuvre the major proceed to do justice to the wine and to indulge in sport reminiscence , and military reminiscence , and travel reminiscence , and social reminiscence , all of which he treat in a manner which call forth the admiration of his audience . then , when supper have at last be finish , and the last cork draw and the last glass fill , the dancer go back to their dance and the to their card , and the major address himself more assiduously than ever to the pursuit of the widow . " i be afraid that you find the room very hot , major , " she remark . " they be rather hot , " he answer candidly . " there be a room here , " she say , " where you might be cool . you might have a cigarette , too . i mean these room as smoking-room . " " then you must come , too . " " no , no , major . you must remember that i be the hostess . " " but there be no one to entertain . they be all entertain each other . you be too unselfish . " " but really , major- -- " " sure you be tire out and need a little rest . " he hold the door open so persuasively that she yield . it be a snug little room , somewhat retire from the bustle , with two or three chair scatter round it , and a sofa of the same material at one side . the widow sit down at one end of this sofa , and the major perch himself at the other , look even red than usual , and puff out his chest and frown , as be his custom upon critical occasion . " do light a cigarette ? " say . " but the smell ? " " i like it . " the major extract one from his flat silver case . his companion roll a spill and light it at the gas . " to one who be as lonely as i be , " she remark , " it be a pleasure to feel that one have friend near one , and to serve them even in trifle . " " lonely ! " say the major , shuffle along the sofa , " i might talk with authority on that point . if i be to turn me toe up there be not a human being would care a about the , unless it be old . " " oh , do n't talk so , " cry , with emotion . " it be a fact . i have kick against me fate at time , though . i have have fancy of late of something happy and cheery . they have come on me as i sit over yonder at the window , and , do what i will , i have not be able to git them from me heart . i know how rash i have be to treasure them , for if they fail me i shall feel me loneliness as i do before . " the major pause and clear his throat huskily , while the widow remain silent , with her head bent and her eye intent upon the pattern of the carpet . " these hope be , " say the major , in a low voice , lean forward and take his companion 's little hand in his thick , pudgy finger , " that you will have pity upon me ; that you -- " " , my very ! " cry heartily , suddenly protrude his hairy head into the room and smile benignantly . " go to the ! " roar the major , spring furiously to his foot , while the 's head disappear like a jack-in-the-box . " forgive the warmth of me language , " the veteran continue , apologetically , " but me feeling overcome me . will you be mine , ? i be a plain soldier , and have little to offer you save a faithful heart , and that be yours , and always will be . will you make the remainder of me life happy by become me wife ? " he endeavour to pass his arm round her waist , but she spring up from the sofa and stand upon the rug , face him with an amused and somewhat triumphant smile upon her buxom feature . " look here , major , " she say , " i be a plain-spoken woman , as my poor that be dead be a plain-spoken man . out with it straight , you come after me , or have you come after my money ? " the major be so astonish at this point-blank question , that for a moment he sit speechless upon the sofa . be a man of ready resource , however , and one who be accustom to sudden emergency , he soon recover himself . " , of course " cry he . " if you have n't a stiver i would do the same . " " take care ! take care ! " say the lady , with a warning finger uplift . " you hear of the breaking of the ? " " what of that ? " " every penny that i have in the world be in it . " this be facer number two for the campaigner . he recover himself more quickly from this one , however , and inflate his chest with even more than his usual pomposity . " , " say he , " you have be straight with me , and , , i will be so with you ? when i first think of you i be down in the world , and , much as i admire you , i own that your money be an inducement as well as . i be so place that it be impossible for me to think of any woman who have not enough to keep up her own end of the game . since that time i have do . how i get it be neither here nor there , but i have a little in the bank and see me way to increase it . you tell me your money be go , and i tell you i have enough for two ; so say the word , , and it be do . " " what ! without the money ? " " damn the money ? " exclaim , and put his arm for the second time around his companion . this time it remain there . what happen after that be neither my business nor the reader 's . couple who have leave their youth behind them have their own little romance quite as much as their junior , and it be occasionally the more heartfelt of the two . " what a naughty boy to swear ! " exclaim the widow at last . " now i must give you a lecture since i have the chance . " " bless her mischievous eye ! " cry the major , with delight in every feature of his face . " you shall give me as many lecture as you . " " you must be good , then , , if you be to be my husband . you must not play billiard for money any more . " " no billiard ! why , pool be worth three or four pound a wake to me . " " it do n't matter . no billiard and no card , and no racing and no betting . must be very good and behave as a distinguished soldier should do . " " what be you at all ? " the major cry . " sure if i be to give up me pool and whist , how be a distinguished soldier , and , above all , a distinguished soldier 's wife , go to live ? " " we will manage , dear , " she say , look roguishly up into his face . " i tell you that my money be all in the that break . " " you do , bad luck ! " " but i do n't tell you that i have draw it all out before it break , dear . it be too bad to put you to such a trial , be n't it ? but really i could n't resist the temptation . shall have money enough without bet , and he shall settle down and tell his storey , and do what he like without anything to bother him . " " bless her heart ! " cry the major fervently ; and the battered old bohemian , as he stoop over and kiss her , feel a tear spring to his eye as he know that he have come into harbour after life 's stormy . " no billiard or card for three month , then , " say the little woman firmly , with her hand round his arm . " none at all mind ! i be go into on a visit to my cousin in the country , and you shall not see me for that time , though you may write . if you can give me your word of honour when i come back that you have give up your naughty way , why -- " " what then ? " " wait till then and you will see , " she say , with a merry laugh . " no , really , i wo n't stay another moment . whatever will the guest say ? i must , ; i really -- " she trip , while the major remain standing where she have leave him , feel a good man than he have do since he be a young ensign and kiss his mother for the last time at the jetty before the great transport carry him off to . everything in the world must have an end , and 's dance be no exception to the rule . the day be break , however , before the last guest have muffle themselves up and the last hansom dash away from the door . the major linger behind to bid farewell , and then rejoin his german friend , who have be compel to wait at the door for the latchkey . " look here , major , " the latter say , when they come into their room , " be it well to tell a gentleman to go to the devil ? you have much offend me . truly i be surprise that you should have so speak ! " " me dear friend , " the old soldier answer , shake his hand , " i would not hurt your feeling for the world . , if i come into the room while you be propose to a lady , you be welcome to use the strong german verb to me that you can lay your tongue to . " " you have , then ? " cry the good-natured german , forget all about his grievance in an instant . " yes . " " and be by her ? " " yes . " " be ! " cry , clap his hand . " three for frau , and another one for frau . we must drink a drink on it ; we truly must . " " so we shall , me boy , but it be time we turn in now . she be a good woman , and she play a good hand at whist . ! she clear the trump and make her long suit as well as ever i see it do in me life ! " with which characteristic piece of eulogy the major bid his comrade good night and retire to his room . 's duty be far from light . not only be he expect to supervise the clerk ' account and to treat with the wholesale dealer , but he be also suppose to spend a great part of his time in the dock , overlook the loading of the outgoing ship and check the cargo of the incoming one . this latter portion of his work be welcome as take him some hour a day from the close counting-house , and allow him to get a sniff of the sea , indeed , a sniff be to be have on the inland side of . there be a pleasing life and bustle , too , in the broad , brown river , with its never-end panorama of vessel of every size and shape which ebb and flow in the great artery of national life . so interesting be this liquid highway to 's practical mind , that he would often stand at the head of the wharf when his work be do and smoke a meditative pipe . it be a quiet spot , which have once be busy enough , but be now supersede by new quay and more convenient landing-place . all over it be scatter great rusty anchor , colossal iron chain , desert melancholy boiler , and other debris which be find in such place , and which might seem to the fanciful to be the shell and skeleton of strange monster wash up there by the tide . to whom do these thing belong ? who have an interest in them ? of what use be they ? it appear to sometimes as if the original owner and their heir must have all die away , and leave these grim relic behind them to any one who might have the charity to remove them . from this coign of vantage a long reach of the river be visible , and sit there would watch the fleet of pass vessel , and let his imagination wander away to the broad ocean which they have traverse , and the fair land under blue sky and warm sun from which they have sail . here be a tiny pant and toil in front of a majestic with her great black hulk towering out of the water and her mast shoot up until the topmast rigging look like the delicate web of some titanic spider . she be from , with tea , and coffee , and spice , and all good thing from the land of small foot and almond eye . here , too , be a boat , the french ensign droop daintily over her stern , and her steam whistle screech a warning to some obstinate lighter , crawl with their burden of coal to a grimy collier whose be whiz away like a corncrake of the deep . that floating palace be an orient boat from . see how , as the darkness fall , a long row of yellow eye glimmer out from her side as the light stream through her countless porthole . and there be the packet-boat come slowly up , very glad to get back into safe water again , for she have have a time in the . a coast brig have evidently have a wild time still , for her main-topmast be crack across , and her rigging be full of the little human mite who crawl about , and reef , and splice , and mend . an old acquaintance of ours be out in that same gale , and be even now make his way into the shelter of the dock . this be none other than the redoubtable , whose ship will persistently keep afloat , to the astonishment of the gallant captain himself , and of every one else who know anything of her sea-going quality . again and again she have be on the point of founder ; and again and again some change in the weather or the steady pump of the crew have prevent her from fulfill her destiny . so surprise be the skipper at these repeated interposition of that he have quite make up his superstitious mind that the ship never would go down , and now devote himself with a whole heart to his old occupation of drink himself into delirium and physick himself out of it again . the have a fair cargo aboard , and be proportionately jubilant . the drunken old sea-dog have take a fancy to 's frank face and honest eye , and greet him with effusion when he come aboard next morning . " knock me asunder , but you look rosy , man ! " he cry . " it be easy to see that you have not be lie off , or get the land mist into your lung in the . " " you look well yourself , captain , " say . " tolerable , tolerable . just a touch of the jump at time . " " we can begin get our cargo out , i suppose ? i have a list here to check it . will you have the hatch off at once ? " " no work for me , " say with decision . " here , , start the cargo , will , and stir your great scotch bone . i have do enough in bring this sieve of a ship all the way from , without work when i be in dock . " be the first mate , a tall , . " i will see , " he say shortly . " you can gang ashore or where you . " " the and , " say the captain , " i say , you be do come up an ' have a glass o ' wine with me . i be only a plain sailor man , but i be damned if my heart ai n't in the right place . you too , will come up and show the way . cock and , corner o ' . " the two have accept his invitation , the captain shuffle off across the gangway and on to terra firma . all day stand at the hatchway of the , check the cargo as it be hoist out of her , while and his motley assistant , dock labourer , seaman , and black from the coast , work and toil in the depth below . the engine rattle and snort , and the great chain clank as it be lower into the hold . " make fast there ! " cry the mate . " aye , aye , sir ! " " all right ? " " all right , sir . " " hoist away ! " and clank , clank go the chain again , and the engine , and up would come a pair of oil cask , as though the crane be some giant forceps which be pluck out the great wooden tooth of the vessel . it seem to , as he stand look down , in hand , that some of the actual malarious air of the coast have be carry home in the hold , so foul and close be the smell evolve from it . great cockchafer crawl about over the package , and occasionally a rat would scamper over the barrel , such a rat as be only to be find in ship which hail from the tropic . on one occasion too , as a tusk of ivory be be hoist out , there be a sudden cry of alarm among the worker , and a long , yellow snake crawl out of the cavity of the trunk and writhe away into the darkness . it be no uncommon thing to find the deadly creature hibernate in the hollow of the tusk until the cold english air arouse them from their torpor , to the cost occasionally of some unhappy stevedore or labourer . all day stand amid grease and steam , bustle and blasphemy , check off the cargo , and look to its conveyance to the warehouse . at one o'clock there be a break of an hour for dinner , and then the work go on until six , when all hand strike and go off to their home or to the accord to inclination . and the mate , both fairly tired by their day 's work , prepare to accept the captain 's invitation , and to meet him up in his quarter . the mate dive down into his cabin , and soon reappear with his face shine and his long hair comb into some sort of order . " i have be perform my ablution , " he say , roll out the last word with great emphasis and pomposity , for , like many scotchman , he have the great possible reverence for a sonorous polysyllable . indeed , in , this national foible be push to excess , for , however inappropriate the word , he never hesitate to drag it into his conversation if he think it would aid in the general effect . " the captain , " he continue , " have be far from salubrious this voyage . he be aye ' o ' his bodily infirmity . " " , perhaps , " remark . the scotchman look at his companion with a great accession of respect . " my ! " he cry . " that be the good i have hear since a word that , of the , say the voyage afore last . would you kindly it again . " " , " say laugh heartily . " , " the mate repeat slowly . " i should n't think ken that , or he have ' communicate it to me . i shall certainly utilize it , and be to you for ' it . " " do n't mention it , " say . " i will let you have as many long word as you like , if you be a collector of them . but what be the matter with the captain ? " " it be aye the drink , " the mate say gravely . " i can ' my modicum ' and enjoy it , but that be no the same as for a man to lock himself up in his cabin , and drink rum steady on from four bell in the ' watch to eight bell in the ' . and then the ' , and ' , and ' as he set up be just ' . it be what might be describe as . " " be he often like that , then ? " ask . " often ! why , he be never anything else , sir . and yet he be a good seaman too , and however ' he may be , he keep some form o ' reckoning , and never far either . he be an to me , sir , for if i take a tithe o ' the amount i will be clean daft . " " he must be dangerous when he be like that ? " remark . " he be that . he empty a down the deck last bout he have , and nigh perforate the carpenter . another time he scoot after the him with a handspike in his hand right up the rigging to the . if the cook have n't slide down the backstay of the mast , he have ' be . " could not refrain from laugh at the last expression . " that be a new word , " he say . " ! " his companion cry with great satisfaction , " it be , be it ? then we be quits now on the . " he be so please that he chuckle to himself for some minute in the depth of his tawny beard . " yes , " he continue at last , " he be dangerous to us at time , and he be dangerous to you . this be atween , as man to man , and be say prejudice , but he do go on when he be in they fit the firm , and insurance , and rotten ship , and such thing , which be all well when sequestrate gentleman like , but sound ' bad when it fa be on the ignorant tympanum of common seaman . " " it be scandalous , " say gravely , " that he should spread such report about his employer . our ship be old , and some of them , in my opinion , hardly safe , but that be a very different thing from imply , as you hint , that wish them to go down . " " we will no argue that , " say the canny scot . " ken on which side his bread be butter . he may wish ' em to sink or he may wish ' em to swim . that be no for us to judge . you will hear him speak as like as not , for he be aye on it when he be half over . here we be , sir . the corner edifice ' the red blind in the window . " during this conversation the two have be thread their way through the intricate and dirty lane which lead up from the water side to the outskirt of . it be quite dark by the time that they reach a long thoroughfare , line by numerous shop , with great gas flare outside them . many of these belong to dealer in marine store , and the numerous suit of , hang up for exhibition , swing to and fro in the uncertain light , like row of attenuated pirate . at every corner be a great with glitter window , and a crowd of slatternly woman and man elbow each other at the door . at the large and most imposing of these the mate and now pull up . " come in this way , " say , who have evidently pay many a visit there before . push open a swing door , he make his way into the crowded bar , where the reek of bad spirit and the smell of squalid humanity seem to to be even more horrible than the effluvium of the hold . " in ? " ask of a rubicund , personage behind the bar . " yes , sir . he be in his room , sir , and ' you . there be a gent with him , sir , but he tell me to send you up . this way , sir . " they be push their way through the crowd to reach the door which lead behind the bar , when 's attention be arrest by the conversation of a very individual who be lean with his elbow upon the counter . " you take my tip , " he say to an elderly man beside him . " you stick to the beer . the in here be clean poison , and it be a sin and a shame as they should be let sell such stuff to christian man . see my sleeve ! " he show the threadbare cuff of his coat , which be corrode away in one part , as by a powerful acid . " i give my word i do that by wipe my lip ' it two or three time after ' at this bar . that be afore i find out that the whisky be solid vitriol . if thread and cotton ca n't stand it , how be the linin ' of a poor cove 's stomach , i will like to know ? " " i wonder , " think to himself , " if one of these poor devil go home and murder his wife , who ought to be hang for it ? be it he , or that villain behind the bar , who , for the sake of the gain of a few greasy copper , give him the poison that madden him ? " he be still ponder over this knotty point when they be usher into the captain 's room . that worthy be lean back in a rocking-chair with his foot perch upon the mantelpiece and a large glass of rum arid water within reach of his great leathery hand . opposite him , in a similar chair and with a similar glass , be no less an individual than our old acquaintance , . as a mercantile clerk in the office of a firm the german be throw into contact with the shipper of the african fleet , and have contract a special alliance with the bibulous , who be a social soul in his hour of relaxation . " come in , my hearty , come in ! " he cry huskily . " take a seat , . and you , , ca n't you bring yourself to your berth without be ask ? you should know your mooring by this time . this be my friend , from 's office . " " and , i think , be , " say the german , shake hand with . " i have hear my very , , speak of your name , sir . " " ah , the old major , " answer . " of course , i remember him well . " " he be not so very old either , " say , in a somewhat surly voice . " he have be take by a very charming and entirely pleasant woman , and they be about to be marry before three month , the one to the other . let me tell you , sir , , who have live with him so long , i have meet no man for whom i have great respect than for the major , however much they give him pill at a club or other such snobbery . " " fill your glass , " break in , push over the bottle of rum . " there be weed in that pay duty , either the one or the other . by the , , a couple of day ago we hardly hope ever to be yarn here . " " it be rather beyond our prognostication , sir , " say the mate , take a pull at his rum . " it be that ! a nasty sea on , , sir , and the old ship so full o ' water that she could not rise to it . they be make a clean breach over us , and we lose nigh everything we could lose . " " i suppose you will have her thoroughly repair now ? " remark . both the skipper and the mate laugh heartily at the observation . " that would n't do , , would it ? " say , shake his head . " we could n't afford to have our screw cut down like that . " " cut down ! you do n't mean to say you be pay in proportion to the rottenness of the ship ? " " there ai n't no use ' a secret of it among friend , " say . " that be just how the land lie with us . a voyage or two back i speak to , and i say to him , say i , ' give the ship an overhaul , ' say ' and good , ' say he , ' but it will mean so much off your wage , ' say he , ' and the mate 's wage as well . ' i put it to him straight and strong , but he stick at that . so and me , we put our head together , and we ' greed it be well to take fifteen pound and the risk , than come down to twelve pound and safety . " " it be scandalous ! " cry hotly . " i could not have believe it . " " bless ! it have do every day , and will be while there be insurance money to be gain , " say , blow a blue cloud up to the ceiling . " it be an easy thing to turn a few thousand a year while there be old ship to be buy , and office which will insure them above their value . there be , of the -- a trade that man do ! he be smart ! collision be his line , and he work ' em well . there war n't a skipper out of as could get run down as as he could . " " get run down ? " " . he will go lollop about in the if there be any fog on , steer for the light o ' any steamer or ' round for all the fog whistle if it be too thick to see . sooner or later , as sure as fate , he will get cut down to the water 's edge . ' , it be a fine game ! half a ' yard o ' print about his noble ' in the newspaper , and maybe a leader about the british tar and unexpected emergency . it once go the length o ' a subscription . ! ! " laugh until he choke . " and what become of this british star ? " ask the german . " he be still about . he be in the passenger trade now . " " ! " ejaculate . " i would not go as a passenger with him for something . " " there be many a way that it be do , sir , " the mate add , fill up his glass again , and pass the bottle to the captain . " there be ' a cranky vessel ' grain in bulk without ' partition board . if you get a little water in , as you be bind to do with a ship o ' that kind , the grain will swell and swell until it burst the seam open , and down go . then there be ignition o ' coal gas aboard o ' steamer . that be a safe game , for nobody can deny it . and there be accident to propeller . if the shaft o ' a propeller break in heavy weather it be a bad look-out . i have know ship leave the dock with their propeller half saw through all round . ' , there be no end o ' the trick o ' the trade . " " i can believe , however , " say stoutly , " that connive at such thing . " " he be on the ' lay , " the seaman answer . " he do n't send ' em down , but he just hang on , and keep his insurance up , and trust in . he have have some good haul that way , though not o ' late . there be the at . that be five thousand , clear , if it be a penny . and the -- be a bad business ! she be never hear of , nor her crew . go down at sea , and leave no trace . " " the crew too ! " cry with horror . " but how about , if what you say be true ? " " we be pay for the risk , " say both the seaman , shrug their shoulder . " but there be government inspector ? " " ! ! i dare say you have see the way some o ' them do their work ! " say . 's mind be fill with consternation at what he have hear . if the african merchant be capable of this , what might he not be capable of ? be his word to be depend on under any circumstance ? and what sort of firm must this be , which turn so fair a side to the world and in which he have embark his fortune ? all these thought flash through his mind as he listen to the gossip of the garrulous old sea dog . a great shock still , however , be in store for him . have be listen to the conversation with an amused look upon his good-humoured face . " ah ! " say he , suddenly strike in , " i tell you something of your own firm which perhaps you do not know . have you hear be about to be marry ? " " to be marry ! " " oh yes ; i have hear it morning at 's office . i think it be the talk of the . " " who be the gal ? " ask , with languid interest . " i disremember her name , " answer . " it be a girl the major have young lady who have live in the same house , and be vat they call a warder . " " his ward ? " cry , spring to his foot and turn as white as a sheet . " not ? you do n't tell me that he be go to marry ? " " be the name . it be , sure enough . " " it be a infamous lie ! " cry hotly . " so it may be , " answer serenely . " i do but say vat i have hear , and hear more than once on good authority . " " if it be true there be villainy in it , " cry , with wild eye , " the black villainy that ever be do upon earth . i will will see him . by heaven , i shall know the truth ! " he rush furiously downstairs and through the bar . there be a cab near the door . " drive into ! " he cry ; " @card@ , . i be on fire to be there ! " the cabman spring on the box , and they rattle away as fast as the horse would go . this sudden exit cause , as may be imagine , considerable surprise in the parlour of the and " he be a tumultuous young man , " the mate remark . " he be off like a clipper in a hurricane . " " i perceive , " say , " he have leave his hat behind him . i do now remember i have hear his name speak with of very young lady by my good , the major . " " then he be jealous belike , " say , with a know shake of the head . " i have feel that way myself before now . i round on , o ' the , over that very thing , twelve month ago come . but i do n't think it be the thing for this young chap to cut away and never say ' with your leave , ' or ' by your leave , ' or as much as ' good night , gentleman all . ' it ai n't what you call straight up an ' down . " " it be transcendental , " say the mate severely ; " that be what i call it . " " ah , my , " the german put in , " when a man be in love you must make excuse for him . i be very sure he do mean no offence . " in spite of this assurance continue to be very sore upon the point . it be only by dint of many of his glass and many argument that his companion could restore him to his pristine good humour . meanwhile , the truant be speed through the night with a fix determination in his heart that he should have before morning such an understanding , one way or the other , as would never again leave room for a doubt . his father 's encouraging word have give fresh heart , and he have renew his importunity with great energy than ever . never surely do any man devote every moment of his time more completely to the winning of a woman 's heart . from morning until night the one idea be ever before his mind and every little want of 's be forestall with a care and foresight which astonish her . the rich fruit and flower find their way unexpectedly into her room ; her table be litter with the late book from 's , and the new piece lay upon her music-stand . nothing which attention and thoughtfulness could do be left undo either by the father or the son . in spite of these attention , however , and the frequent solicitation of her guardian , stand firmly to her colour . if the of the present be false , she at least would be true to the memory of the of other day , the lad who have first whisper word of love into her ear . her ideal should remain with her whatever might befall . no other man could ever take the place of that . that be from some unexplained and unaccountable reason false to her appear to be beyond all question . her trusting and innocent heart could not dream of the subtle network which be be wind round her . her secluded life have leave her very ignorant of the way of the world , and the possibility of an elaborate deceit be practise upon her have never occur to her . from the day that she hear the extract of the letter read by her guardian she never doubt but that such letter be receive at the office by the man who profess to love her . how could she hesitate to believe it when it be confirm by his avoidance of and of herself ? the cause of it all be a mystery which no amount of speculation could clear up . sometimes the poor girl would blame herself , as be the way of woman in such case . " i have not see enough of the world , " she would say to herself . " i have none of the charm of these woman whom i read of in the novel . no doubt i seem dull and insipid in his eye . and -- " there always remain at the end of her cogitation the same vague sense of bewilderment and mystery . she endeavour as far as possible to avoid , and stay in her room for the most part on the day when he be at home . he have , however , on the advice of his father , cease press his suit except in the silent manner aforementioned , so that she gradually take courage , and end by resume her old habit . in her heart she pity the young merchant very sincerely , for he be look haggard and pale . " poor fellow , " she think as she watch him , " he certainly love me . ah , , ! have you only be as constant , how happy we should be ! " she be even prompt sometimes to cheer up by some kind word or look . this he naturally take to be an encouragement to renew his advance . perhaps he be not far wrong , for if love be want pity be occasionally an excellent substitute . one morning after breakfast the elder call his son aside into the library . " i have have a notice , " he say , " as to pay up dividend . our time be short , . you must bring matter to a head . if you do n't it will be too late . " " you must n't pick fruit before it be ripe , " the other answer moodily . " you can try if it be ripe , though . if not , you can try again . i think that your chance be a good one . she be alone in the , and the table have be clear . you can have a good opening . go , my son , and may prosper you ! " " very well . do you wait in here , and i shall let you know how thing go . " the young man button up his coat , pull down his cuff , and walk back into the with a sullen look of resolution upon his dark face . be sit in a wicker chair by the window , arrange flower in a vase . the morning sunlight stream in upon her give a colour to her pale face and glitter in her heavy coil of chestnut hair . she wear a light pink morning dress which add to the ethereal effect of her lithe beautiful figure . as enter she look round and start at sight of his face . instinctively she know on what errand he have come . " you will be late at , " she say , with a constrained smile . " it be nearly eleven now . " " i be not go to the office , " he answer gravely . " i be come in here , , to know my fate . you know very well , and must have know for some time back , that i love you . if you will marry me you will make me a happy man , and i will make you a happy woman . i be not very eloquent and that sort of thing , but what i say i mean . what have you to say in answer ? " he lean his broad hand on the back of a chair as he speak , and drum nervously with his finger . have droop her head over the flower , but she look up at him now with frank , pity eye . " put this idea out of your head , , " she say , in a low but firm voice . " believe me , i shall always be grateful to you for the kindness which you have show me of late . i will be a sister to you , if you will let me , but i can never be more . " " and why not ? " ask , still lean over the chair , with an angry light begin to sparkle in his dark eye . " why can you never be my wife ? " " it be so , . you must not think of it . i be so sorry to grieve you . " " you ca n't love me , then , " cry the young merchant hoarsely . " other woman before now would have give their eye to have have me . do you know that ? " " for goodness ' sake , then go back to the other , " say , half amused and half angry . that suspicion of a smile upon her face be the one thing need to set 's temper in a blaze . " you wo n't have me , " he cry savagely . " i have n't get the air and grace of that fellow , i suppose . you have n't get him out of your head , though he be off with another girl . " " how dare you speak to me so ? " cry , spring to her foot in honest anger . " it be the truth , and you know it , " return , with a sneer . " be n't you too proud to be hang on to a man who do n't want -- a man that be a smooth-tongued sneak , with the heart of a rabbit ? " " if he be here you would not dare to say so ! " retort hotly . " would n't i ? " he snarl fiercely . " no , you would n't . i do n't believe that he have ever be untrue to me . i believe that you and your father have plan to make me believe it and to keep us apart . " heaven know what it be that suddenly bring this idea most clearly before 's mind . perhaps it be that 's face , distort with passion , give her some dim perception of the wickedness of which such a nature might be capable . the dark face turn so much dark at her word that she feel a great throb of joy at her heart , and know that this strange new thought which have flash upon her be the truth . " you ca n't deny it , " she cry , with shine eye and clench hand . " you know that it be true . i shall see him and hear from his own lip what he have to say . he love me still , and i love him , and have never cease to love him . " " oh , you do , do you ? " snarl , take a step forward , with a devilish gleam in his eye . " your love may do him very little good . we shall see which of us get the good of it in the long run . -- " his passion be so furious that he stop , fairly unable to articulate another word . with a threatening motion of his hand he turn upon his heel and rush from the room . as he pass it chance that , 's little terrier , run across his path . all the brutality of the man 's soul rise up in the instant . he raise his heavy boot , and send the poor little creature howl and writhe under the sofa , whence it piteously emerge upon three leg , trail the fourth one behind it . " the brute ! " cry , as she fondle the injured animal and pour indignant tear over it . her gentle soul be so stir by the cowardly deed that she feel that she could have flow at her late suitor be he still in the room . " poor little ! that kick be mean for me in reality , my little pet . never mind , dear , there be bright day come , and he have not forget me , . i know it ! i know it ! " the little dog whine sympathetically , and lick its mistress 's hand as though it be look into its canine future , and could also discern good day ahead . , fierce and lower , tramp into the library , and tell his father brusquely of the result of his wooing . what occur in that interview be never know to any third person . the servant , who have some idea that something be afoot , have record that at the beginning of the conversation the bass voice of the son and the high raucous tone of the father be hear in loud recrimination and reproach . then they suddenly sink into tone so low that there might have be complete silence in the room for all that any one could tell from the passage outside . this whisper conversation may have last the great part of an hour . at the end of it the young merchant depart for the . it have be remark that from that time there come a change over both the father and the change so subtle that it could hardly be describe , though it leave its mark upon them both . it be not that the grey , wolfish face of the old man look even grey and fierce , or that the hard , arrogant expression of deepen into something even more sinister . it be that a shadow hang over both their vague indefinable of man who carry a thought in their mind on which it be not good to dwell . during that long hour have remain in the , still nurse her injured companion , and very busy with her own thought . she be as convince now that have be true to her as if she have have the assurance from his own lip . still there be much that be which she be unable to fathom . a vague sense of the wickedness around her depressed and weigh her down . what deep scheme could these man have invent to keep him away from her during these long week ? be he , too , under some delusion , or the victim of some conspiracy ? whatever have be do be certainly connive at by her guardian . for the first time a true estimate of the character of the elder break upon her , and she dimly realize that the pious , soft-spoken merchant be more to be dread than his brutal son . a shudder run through her whole frame as , look up , she see him stand before her . his appearance be far from reassure . his hand be clasp behind his back , his head bent forward , and he survey her with a most malignant expression upon his face . " well do ! " he say , with a bitter smile . " well do ! this be a good morning 's work , . you have repay your father 's friend for the care he have bestow upon you . " " my only wish be to leave your house , " cry , with an angry flash in her deep blue eye . " you be a cruel , wicked , hypocritical old man . you have deceive me about . i read it in your son 's face , and now i read it in your own . how could you do , how could you have the heart ? " be fairly stagger by this blaze of feminine anger in his demure and obedient ward . " know , " he say , " whatever my fault may have be , neglect of you have not be among them . i be not immaculate . even the just man . if i have endeavour to wean you from this foolish love affair of yours , it have be entirely because i see that it be against your own interest . " " you have tell lie in order to turn me away from the only man who ever love me . you and your odious son have conspire to ruin my happiness and break my heart . what have you tell him that keep him away ? i shall see him and learn the truth . " 's face be unnaturally calm and rigid as she face her guardian 's angry gaze . " silence ! " the old man cry hoarsely . " you forget your position in this house . you be presume too much upon my kindness . as to this girl 's fancy of yours , you may put all thought of it out of your head . i be still your guardian , and i should be culpably remiss if i ever allow you to see this man again . this afternoon you shall come with me to . " " to ? " " yes . i have take a small country seat there , where we intend to spend some month of the winter . you shall leave it when you have reconcile yourself to forget these romantic idea of not till then . " " then i shall never leave it , " say , with a sigh . " that will depend upon yourself . you shall at least be guard there from the advance of design person . when you come of age you may follow your own fancy . until then my conscience demand , and the law allow , that i should spare no pain to protect you from your own folly . we start from at four . " turn for the door , but look round as he be leave the room . " forgive you , " he say solemnly , raise his lean hand towards the ceiling , " for what you have do this day ! " , leave to herself , be much concern by this fresh misfortune . she know that her guardian have power to carry out his plan , and that there be no appeal from his decision . what could she do ? she have not a friend in the wide world to whom she could turn for advice or assistance . it occur to her to fly to the at , and throw herself upon their compassion . it be only the thought of which prevent her . in her heart she have fully exonerate him , yet there be much to be explain before they could be to each other as of old . she might write to , but then her guardian have not tell her what part of they be go to . she finally come to the conclusion that it would be good to wait , and to write when she have reach her destination . in the meantime , she go drearily to her room and begin packing , aid by the maid , . at three a cab drive up to the door , and the old merchant step out of it . the box be throw upon the top , and the young lady curtly order to get in . take his seat beside her , and give a sign to the cabman to drive on . as they rattle out of the square , look back at the great gloomy mansion in which she have spend the last three year of her life . have she know what the future be to bring , it be possible that she would have cling even to that sombre and melancholy old house as to an ark of safety . another cab pass through that cab which bear a and wild-eyed young man , who look ever and anon impatiently out of the window to see if he be near his destination . long before reach no. @card@ he have open the door , and be stand upon the step . the instant that the cab pull up he spring off , and ring loudly at the great brass bell which flank the heavy door . " be in ? " he ask , as appear at the door . " no , sir . " " , be she at home ? " he say excitedly . " no , sir . they have both go away . " " go away ! " " yes . go into the country , sir . and , too , sir . " " and when be they come back ? " he ask , in bewilderment . " they be not come back . " " impossible ! " cry in despair . " what be their address , then ? " " they have leave no address . i be sorry i ca n't help you . good night , sir . " close the door , laugh maliciously at the visitor 's bewilder look . she know the fact of the case well , and have long be jealous of her young mistress , she be not sorry to find thing go wrong with her . stand upon the doorstep look blankly into the night . he feel daze and bewilder . what fresh villainy be this ? be it a confirmation of the 's report , or be it a contradiction of it ? cold bead stand upon his forehead as he think of the possibility of such a thing . " i must find her , " he cry , with clench hand , and turn away heartsick into the turmoil and bustle of the street . , the , be still stand behind the ponderous hall door , listen , with a smile upon her face , to young 's retreat footstep , when another and a brisk tread catch her ear come from the opposite direction . the smile die away as she hear it , and her feature assume a peculiar expression , in which it would be hard to say whether fear or pleasure predominate . she pass her hand up over her face and smooth her hair with a quick nervous gesture , glance down at the same time at her snowy apron and the bright ribbon which set it off . whatever her intention may have be , she have no time to improve upon her toilet before a key turn in the door and step into the hall . as he see her shadowy figure , for the gas be low , he utter a hoarse cry of surprise and fear , and stagger backwards against the door-post . " do n't be afeared , , " she say in a whisper ; " it be only me . " " the devil take you ! " cry furiously . " what make you stand about like that ? you give me quite a turn . " " i do n't mean for to do it . i have only just be answer of the door . why , surely you have come in before now and find me in the hall without make much account of it . " " ah , lass , " answer , " my nerve have have a shake of late . i have feel queer all day . look how my hand shake . " " well , i be bless ! " say the girl , with a titter , turn up the gas . " i never think to see you afeared of anything . why , you look as white as a sheet ! " " there , that be enough ! " he answer roughly . " where be the other ? " " be out . and and the boy be downstairs . " " come into the library here . they will think that you be up in the bedroom . i want to have a quiet word or two with you . turn up that reading lamp . well , be they go ? " " yes , they be go , " she answer , stand by the side of the couch on which he have throw himself . " your father come about three with a cab , and take her away . " " she do n't make a fuss ? " " make a fuss ? no ; why should she ? there be fuss enough make about her , in all conscience . oh , , before she get between us you be kind to me at time . i could stand harsh word from you six day a week , if there be a chance of a kind one on the seventh . but what notice do you take of me ? " she begin to whimper and to wipe her eye with a little discolour pocket-handkerchief . " drop it , woman , drop it ! " cry her companion testily . " i want information , not snivel . she seem reconcile to go ? " " yes , she go quiet enough , " the girl say , with a furtive sob . " just give me a drop of brandy out of that bottle over one with the cork half out . i have not get over my start yet . do you hear my father say anything as to where they be go ? " " i hear him tell the cabman to drive to . " " nothing more ? " " no. " " well , if he wo n't tell you , i will . they have go down to , my lass . be the name of the place , and it be a pleasant little corner near the sea . i want you to go down there as well . " " want me to go ? " " yes ; they need some one who be smart and handy to keep house for them . there be some old woman already , i believe , but she be old and useless . i will warrant you would n't take long get thing shipshape . my father intend to stay down there some little time with . " " and how about you ? " the girl ask , with a quick flash of suspicion in her dark eye . " do n't trouble about me . i shall stay behind and mind the business . some one must be on the spot . i think cook and and ought to be able to look after me among them . " " and i wo n't see you at all ? " the girl cry , with a quiver in her voice . " oh yes , you shall . i will be down from to every week , and perhaps often . if business go well i may come down and stay for some time . whether i do or not may depend upon you . " start and utter an exclamation of surprise . " how can it depend upon me ? " she ask eagerly . " well , " say , in a hesitate way , " it may depend upon whether you be a good girl , and do what you be tell or not . i be sure that you would do anything to serve me , would you not ? " " you know very well that i would , . when you want anything do you remember it , but if you have no use for me , then there be never a kind look on your face or a kind word from your lip . if i be a dog you could not use me bad . i could stand your harshness . i could stand the blow you give me , and forgive you for it , from my heart ; but , oh ! it cut me to the very soul to be stand by and wait while you be make up to another woman . it be more than i can bear . " " never mind , my girl , " say in a soothing voice ; " that be all over and do with . see what i have bring you . " he rummage in his pocket and produce a little parcel of tissue paper , which he hand to her . it be only a small silver anchor , with scotch pebble inlay in it . the woman 's eye , however , flash as she look at it , and she raise it to her lip and kiss it passionately . " bless it and you too ! " she say . " i have hear tell as the anchor be the emblem of hope , and so it shall be with me . oh , , you may travel far and meet them as can play and can sing and do many a thing as i ca n't do , but you will never get one who will love you as dearly and well . " " i know it , my lass , i know it , " say , smooth down her dark hair , for she have drop upon her knee beside the couch . " i have never meet your equal yet . that be why i want you down at . i must have some one there that i can trust . " what be i to do down at ? " she ask . " i want you to be 's companion . she will be lonely , and will need some other woman in the house to look after her . " " curse her ! " cry , spring to her foot with flash eye . " you be still think of her , then ! she must have this ; she must have that ! everything else be as dirt before her . i will not serve there ! you can knock me down if you like . " " , " say slowly , " do you hate ? " " from the bottom of my soul , " she answer . " well , if you hate her , i tell you that i hate her a thousand time more . you think that i be fond of her . all that be over now , and you may set your mind at ease . " " why do you want her so well care for , then ? " ask the girl suspiciously . " i want some one who feel towards her as i do to be by her side . if she be never to come back from it would be nothing to me . " " what make you look at me so strangely ? " she say , shrink away from his intense gaze . " never mind . you go . you will understand many thing in time which seem strange to you now . at present if you will do what i ask you will oblige me greatly . will you go ? " " yes , i will go . " " there be a good lass . give us a kiss , my girl . you have the right spirit in you . i will let you know when the train go , and i will write to my father to expect you . now , off with you , or you will have them gossip downstairs . good night . " " good night , , " say the girl , with her hand upon the handle of the library door . " you have make my heart glad this night . i live in in hope . " " i wonder what the deuce she hope about , " the young merchant say to himself as she close the door behind her . " hope i will marry her , i suppose . she must be of a very sanguine disposition . a girl like that might be invaluable down at . if we have no other need for her , she would be an excellent spy . " he lay for some little time on the couch with bent brow and purse lip , muse over the possibility of the future . while this dialogue have be go on in the library of , be still wend his way homewards with a feeling of weight in his mind and a presentiment of misfortune which overshadow his whole soul . in vain he assure himself that this disappearance of 's be but temporary , and that the rumour of an engagement between her and be too ridiculous to be believe for a moment . argue it as he would , the same dread , horrible feeling of impending trouble weigh upon him . impossible as it be to imagine that be false to him , it be strange that on the very day that this rumour reach his ear she should disappear from . how bitterly he regret now that he have allow himself to be persuade by into cease to communicate with her . he begin to realize that he have be dupe , and that all these specious promise as to a future consent to their union have be so many bait to amuse him while the valuable present be slip away . what could he do now to repair the past ? his only course be to wait for the morrow and see whether the senior partner would appear at the office . if he do so , the young man be determine that he should have an understanding with him . so downcast be that , on arrive at , he would have slip off to his room at once have he not meet his burly father upon the stair . " bed ! " roar the old man upon hear his son 's proposition . " nothing of the sort , sir . come down into the parlour and smoke a pipe with me . your mother have be wait for you all the evening . " " i be sorry to be late , mother , " the lad say , kiss the old lady . " i have be down at the dock all day and have be busy and worried . " be sit in her chair beside the fire , knit , when her son come in . at the sound of his voice she glance anxiously up at his face , with all her motherly instinct on the alert . " what be it , my boy ? " she say . " you do n't look yourself . something have go wrong with you . surely you be not keep anything secret from your old mother ? " " do n't be so foolish as that , my boy , " say the doctor earnestly . " if you have anything on your mind , out with it . there be nothing so far wrong but that it ca n't be set right , i will be bind . " thus press , their son tell them all that have happen , the rumour which he have hear from at the and , and the subsequent visit to . " i can hardly realize it all yet , " he say in conclusion . " my head seem to be in a whirl , and i ca n't reason about it . " the old couple listen very attentively to his narrative , and be silent some little time after he have finish . his mother first break the silence . " i be always sure , " she say , " that we be wrong to stop our correspondence at the request of . " " it be easy enough to say that now , " say ruefully . " at the time it seem as if we have no alternative . " " there be no use cry over spill milk , " remark the old physician , who have be very grave during his son 's narrative . " we must set to work and get thing right again . there be one thing very certain , , and that be that be a girl who never do or could do a dishonourable thing . if she say that she would wait for you , my boy , you may feel perfectly safe ; and if you doubt her for one moment you ought to be deuced well ashamed of yourself . " " well say , governor ! " cry , with beaming face . " now , that be exactly my own feeling , but there be so much to be explain . why have they leave , and where have they go to ? " " no doubt that old scoundrel think that your patience would soon come to an end , so he get the start of you by carry the girl off into the country . " " and if he have do this , what can i do ? " " nothing . it be entirely within his right to do it . " " and have her stow away in some little cottage in the country , with that brute hanging round her all the time . it be the thought of that that drive me wild . " " you trust in her , my boy , " say the old doctor . " we will try our good in the meantime to find out where she have go to . if she be unhappy or need a friend you may be sure that she will write to your mother . " " yes , there be always that hope , " exclaim , in a more cheerful voice . " i may learn something at the office . " " do n't make the mistake of quarrel with the . after all , they be within their right in do what they appear to have do . " " they may be within their legal right , " cry indignantly ; " but the old man make a deliberate compact with me , which he have break . " " never mind . do n't give them an advantage by lose your temper . " the doctor chat away over the matter for some time , and his word , together with those of his mother , cheer the young fellow 's heart . nevertheless , after they have retire to their room , continue to be very thoughtful and very grave . " i do n't like it , " he say , more than once . " i do n't like the idea of the poor girl be leave entirely in the hand of that pair of beauty . grant that no harm come of it , ! " a prayer which his good wife echo with all the strength of her kindly nature . it be already dusk when and his ward reach . he give order to the guard that the luggage should be stamp , but take care that she should not hear the name of their destination . hurry her rapidly down the platform amid the confused heap of luggage and current of eager passenger , he push her into a first-class carriage , and spring after her just as the bell ring and the wheel begin to revolve . they be alone . crouch up into the corner among the cushion , and wrap her rug round her , for it be bitterly cold . the merchant pull a from his pocket and proceed by the light of the lamp above him to add up column of figure . he sit very upright in his seat , and appear to be as absorb in his work as though he be among his paper in . he neither glance at his companion nor make any inquiry as to her comfort . as she sit opposite to him she could not keep her eye from his hard angular face , every rugged feature of which be exaggerate by the flicker yellow light above him . those deep-set eye and sunken cheek have be familiar to her for year . how be it that they now , for the first time , strike her as be terrible ? be it that new expression which have appear upon them , that hard inexorable set about the mouth , which give a more sinister character to his whole face ? as she gaze at him an ineffable loathing and dread rise in her soul , and she could have shriek out of pure terror . she put her hand up to her throat with a gasp to keep down the sudden inclination to cry out . as she do so her guardian glance over the top of the with his piercing light grey eye . " do n't get hysterical ! " he cry . " you have give us trouble enough without that . " " oh , why be you so harsh ? " she cry , throw out her arm towards him in eloquent entreaty , while the tear course down her cheek . " what have i do that be so dreadful ? i could not love your son , and i do love another . i be so grieve to have offend you . you use to be kind and like a father to me . " " and a nice return you have make me ! ' your father , ' say the good old book . what honour do you give me save to disobey every command which i have ever give you . i have to blame myself to some extent for have allow you to go on that most pernicious trip to , where you be throw into the company of this young adventurer by his scheming old fool of a father . " it would have be a study for a to depict the craggy , strongly line face of the old merchant , and the beautiful pleading one which look across at him , with the light throw strange shadow over both . as he speak she brush the tear from her eye and an angry flush spring to her cheek . " you may say what you like of me , " she say bitterly . " i suppose that be one of your privilege as my guardian . you have no right , however , to speak evil of my friend . ' he who his brother a fool , ' i think the good old book say something of that . " be stagger for a moment by this unexpected counter . then he take off his broad-brimmed hat and bow his head with droop lid . " out of the mouth of babe and of suckling ! " he cry . " you be right . i speak too warmly . it be my zeal for you which betray me . " " the same zeal which make you tell me so many thing which i now know to be untrue about , " say , wax more fearless as her mind turn to her wrong . " you be become impertinent , " he answer , and resume his calculation in his . cower back into her corner again , while the train thunder and screech and rattle through the darkness . look through the steamy window , nothing be to be see save the twinkle here and there of the light of the scattered country cottage . occasionally a red signal lamp would glare down upon her like the bloodshot eye of some demon who preside over this kingdom of iron and steam . far behind a lurid trail of smoke mark the way that they have come . to 's mind it be all as weird and gloomy and cheerless even as the thought within her . and they be gloomy enough . where be she go ? how long be she go for ? what be she to do when there ? on all these point she be absolutely ignorant . what be the object of this sudden flight from ? her guardian could have separate her from the in many less elaborate way than this . could it be that he intend some system of pressure and terrorism by which she should be force to accept as a suitor . she clench her little white tooth as she think of it , and register a vow that nothing in this world would ever bring her to give in upon that point . there be only one bright spot in her outlook . when she reach her destination she would at once write to , tell her where she be , and ask her frankly for an explanation of their sudden silence . how much wise if she have do so before . only a foolish pride have withhold her from it . the train have already stop at one large junction . look out through the window she see by the lamp that it be . after another interminable interval of clatter and toss and plunge through the darkness , they come to a second station of importance , . " we be near our destination , " remark , shut up his book . this prove to be a small wayside station , illuminate by a single lamp , which give no information as to the name . they be the only passenger who alight , and the train roll on for , leave them with their trunk upon the dark and narrow platform . it be a black night with a bitter wind which carry with it a suspicion of dampness , which might have be rain , or might have be the drift of the neighbour ocean . be numb with the cold , and even her gaunt companion stamp his foot and shiver as he look about him . " i telegraph for a trap , " say he to the guard . " be there not one waiting ? " " yes , sir ; if you be , there be a trap from the ' . here , , here be your gentleman . " at this summons a ostler emerge into the circle of light throw by the single lamp and , touch his hat , announce in a surly voice that he be the individual in question . the guard and he then proceed to drag the trunk to the vehicle . it be a small wagonette , with a high seat for the driver in front . " where to , sir ? " ask the driver , when the traveller have take their seat . " to . do you know where that be ? " " two mile from here , and close to the railway line , " say the man . " there hai n't be no one ' there for two year at the least . " " we be expect and all will be ready for us , " say . " go as fast as you can , for we be cold . " the driver crack his whip , and the horse start at a brisk trot down the dark country road . look round her , see that they be pass through a large country village , consist of a broad main street , with a few insignificant offshoot branch away on either side . a church stand on one side , and on the other the village inn . the door be open and the light shine through the red curtain of the bar parlour look warm and cosy . the clink of glass and the murmur of cheerful voice sound from within . , as she look across , feel doubly cheerless and lonely by the contrast . look too , but with different emotion . " another plague spot , " he cry , jerk his head in that direction . " in town or country it be the same . these be scatter over the whole face of the land , and every one of them be a focus of disease and misery . " " beg your pardon , sir , " the surly driver observe , screw round in his seat . " that ' ere be the ' , sir , where i be in , and it ai n't no , but a real right down good house . " " all liquor be poison , and every house devote to the sale of it be a sinful house , " say curtly . " do n't you say that to my , " remark the driver . " he be a big man ' a bad temper and a hand like a leg o ' mutton . hold up , will ! " the last remark be address to the horse , which have stumble in go down a sharp incline . they be out of the village by this time , and the road be line on either side by high hedge , which throw a dense shadow over everything . the feeble lamp of the wagonette bore two little yellow tunnel of light on either side . the man let the rein lie loose upon the horse 's back , and the animal pick out the roadway for itself . as they swing round from the narrow lane on to a broad road break out into a little cry of pleasure . " there be the sea ! " she exclaim joyfully . the moon have break from behind the cloud and glitter on the vast silvery expanse . " yes , that be the sea , " the driver say , " and them light down yonder be at , where the live ; and over there , " point with his whip to a long dark shadow on the water , " be the . " " the what ? " " the of , he mean , " say . the driver look at him reproachfully . " of course , " say he , " if you folk know more about it than we who be bear an ' breed in the place , it be no manner o ' use our ' to teach you . " with this sarcastic comment he withdraw into himself , and refuse to utter another word until the end of their journey . it be not long before this be attain . pass down a deeply rut lane , they come to a high stone wall which extend for a couple of hundred yard . it have a crumble , decay appearance , as far as could be judge in the uncertain light . this wall be break by a single iron gate , flank by two high pillar , each of which be surmount by some weather-beaten heraldic device . pass through they turn up a wind avenue , with line of tree on either side , which shoot their branch so thickly above them that they might have be drive through some sombre tunnel . this avenue terminate in an open space , in the midst of which towered a great irregular whitewash building , which be the old priory . all below it be swathe in darkness , but the upper window catch the glint of the moon and emit a pallid and sickly glimmer . the whole effect be so weird and gloomy that feel her heart sink within her . the wagonette pull up in front of the door , and assist her to alight . there have be no light or any symptom of welcome , but as they pull down the trunk the door open and a little old woman appear with a candle in her hand , which she carefully shade from the wind while she peer out into the darkness . " be that ? " she cry . " of course it be , " the merchant say impatiently . " do i not telegraph and tell you that i be come ? " " yes , yes , " she answer , hobble forward with the light . " and this be the young lady ? come in , my dear , come in . we have not get thing very smart yet , but they will soon come right . " she lead the way through a lofty hall into a large sitting-room , which , no doubt , have be the monkish refectory in bygone day . it look very bleak and cold now , although a small fire sputter and sparkle in the corner of the great iron grate . there be a pan upon the fire , and the deal table in the centre of the room be lay out roughly as for a meal . the candle which the old woman have carry in be the only light , though the flicker fire cast strange fantastic shadow in the further corner and among the great oaken rafter which form the ceiling . " come up to the fire , my dear , " say the old woman . " take off your cloak and warm yourself . " she hold her own shrivel arm towards the blaze , as though her short exposure to the night air have chill her . glance at her , see that her face be and cunning , with a loose low lip which expose a line of yellow tooth , and a chin which bristle with a tuft of long grey hair . from without there come the crunch of gravel as the wagonette turn and rattle down the avenue . listen to the sound of the wheel until they die away in the distance . they seem somehow to be the last link which bind her to the human race . her heart fail her completely , and she burst into tear . " what be the matter then ? " the old woman ask , look up at her . " what be cry about ? " " oh , i be so miserable and so lonely , " she cry . " what have i do that i should be so unhappy ? why should i be take to this horrible , horrible place ? " " what be the matter with the place ? " ask her wither companion . " i do n't see nought amiss with it . here be ' . he do n't grumble at the place , i will . " the merchant be not in the good of temper , for he have have an altercation with the driver about the fare , and be cold into the bargain . " at it again ? " he say roughly , as he enter . " it be i who ought to weep , i think , who have be put to all this trouble and inconvenience by your disobedience and weakness of mind . " do not answer , but sit upon a coarse deal chair beside the fire , and bury her face in her hand . all manner of vague fear and fancy fill her mind . what be do now ? how quickly he would fly to her rescue do he but know how strangely she be situate ! she determine that her very first action next morning should be to write to and to tell her , not only where she be , but all that have occur . the reflection that she could do this cheer her heart , and she manage to eat a little of the supper which the old woman have now place upon the table . it be a rough stew of some sort , but the long journey have give an edge to their appetite , and the merchant , though usually epicurean in his taste , eat a hearty meal . when supper be over the crone , who be address by as , lead the way upstairs and show to her room . if the furniture of the dining-room have be spartan in its simplicity , this be even more so , for there be nothing in it save a small iron bedstead , much rust from want of use , and a high wooden box on which stand the simple toilet requisite . in spite of the poverty of the apartment have never be more glad to enter her luxurious chamber at home . the little room be a haven of rest where she would be leave , for one night at least , to her own thought . as she lie in bed , however , she could hear far away the subdued murmur of 's voice and the shrill tone of the old woman . they be in deep and animated converse . though they be too far distant for her to distinguish a word , something tell her that their talk be about herself , and the same instinct assure her that it bode her little good . when she awake in the morning it be some little time before she could realize where she be or recall the event which have make such a sudden change in her life . the bare , cold room , with the whitewash wall , and the narrow bed upon which she lie , bring back to her the recollection of a hospital ward which she have see in , and her first thought be that she have have some accident and have be convey to some such establishment . the delusion be only momentary , however , for her true situation come back to her at once with all its vague horror . of the two , she would have prefer that her first impression have be correct . the small window of her apartment be cover by a dirty muslin blind . she rise and , draw it aside , look eagerly out . from what she have see the night before she have hope that this prison to which she have be convey might make amends for its loneliness by some degree of natural beauty . the scene which now meet her eye soon dispel any expectation of the sort . the avenue with its tree lie on the other side of the house . from her window nothing be visible but a dreary expanse of and stretch down to the sea . at high tide this enormous waste of dreariness and filth be cover by the water , but at present it lie before her in all its naked hideousness , the very type of dullness and desolation . here and there a few scattered reed , or an unhealthy greenish scum upon the mud , give a touch of colour to the scene ; but for the most part the great plain be all of the same sombre mud tint , with its monotony break only by the white fleck where the swarm of gull and kittiwake have settle in the hope of pick up whatever have be leave by the recede tide . away across the broad surface a line of sparkling foam mark the fringe of the ocean , which stretch away to the horizon . a mile or two to the eastward of her see some sign of house , and a blue smoke which flicker up into the air . this she guess to be the fishing village of , which the driver have mention the night before . she feel , as she gaze at the little hamlet and the mast of the boat in front of it , that she be not alone in the world , and that even in this strange and desolate place there be honest heart to whom as a last resource she could appeal . she be still stand at the window when there come a knock at the door , and she hear the voice of the old woman ask if she be awake . " breakfast be ready , " she say , " and the master be why you n't down . " on this summons hasten her toilet and make her way down the old wind stair to the room in which they have sup the night before . surely must have have a heart of flint not to be melt by the sight of that fair , fresh face . his feature set as hard as adamant as she enter the room , and he look at her with eye which be pucker and angry . " you be late , " he say coldly . " you must remember that you be not in . ' an idle soul shall suffer hunger , ' say the prophet . you be here to be discipline , and discipline you shall be . " " i be sorry , " she answer . " i think that i must have be tire by our journey . " the vast room look even more comfortless and bleak than on the preceding evening . on the table be a plate of ham and egg . serve out a portion , and push it in her direction . she sit down on one of the rough wooden chair and eat listlessly , wonder how all this be go to end . after breakfast order the old woman out of the room , and , stand in front of the fire with his long leg apart and his hand behind his back , he tell her in harsh concise language what his intention be . " i have long determine , " he say , " that if you run counter to my wish , and persist in your infatuated affection for that scapegrace , i should remove you to some secluded spot , where you might reconsider your conduct and form good resolution for the future . this country house answer the purpose admirably , and as an old servant of mine , , chance to reside in the neighbourhood , i have warn her that at any time i might come down and should expect to find thing ready . your rash and heartless conduct have , however , precipitate matter , and we have arrive before her preparation be complete . our future arrangement will therefore be less primitive than they be at present . here you shall remain , young lady , until you show sign of repentance , and of a willingness to undo the harm which you have do . " " if you mean until i consent to marry your son , then i shall live and die here , " the girl say bravely . " that rest with yourself . as i say before , you be under discipline here , and you may not find existence such a bed of rose as it be in . " " can i have my maid ? " ask . " i can hardly stay here with no one but the old woman in the house . " " be come down . i have a telegram from to that effect , and he will himself join us for a day or two in each week . " " here ! " cry in horror . her chief consolation through all her trouble have be that there seem to be some chance of get rid of her terrible suitor . " and why not ? " the old man ask angrily . " be you so bitter against the lad as to grudge him the society of his own father ? " be save from further reproach by the entrance of the old woman to clear the table . the last item of intelligence , however , have give her a terrible shock , and at the same time have fill her with astonishment . what could the , man about town want in this dreary abode ? she know well , and be sure that he be not a man to alter his way of life or suffer discomfort of any kind without some very definite object . it seem to her that this be a new mesh in the net which be be draw round her . when her guardian have leave the room ask for a sheet of paper . the crone shake her head and wag her pendulous lip in derision . " think as you would be after that , " she say . " there ai n't no paper here , nor pen neither , nor ink neither . " " what , none ! , do have pity on me , and get me a sheet , however old and soil . see , here be some silver ! you be very welcome to it if you will give me the material for write one letter . " look longingly with her blear eye at the few shilling which the girl hold out to her , but she shake her head . " i n't do it , " she say . " it be as much as my place be worth . " " then i shall walk down to myself , " say angrily . " i have no doubt that the people in the post office will let me sit there and write it . " the old hag laugh hoarsely to herself until the scraggy sinew of her wither neck stand out like whipcord . she be still chuckle and cough when the merchant come back into the room . " what then ? " he ask sternly , look from one to the other . he be himself constitutionally averse to merriment , and he be irritate by it in other . " why be you laugh , ? " " i be at her , " the woman wheeze , point with tremulous finger . " she be ' me for paper , and ' as she would go and write a letter at the . " " you must understand once for all , " roar , turn savagely upon the girl , " that you be cut off entirely from the outer world . i shall give you no loophole which you may utilize to continue your intimacy with undesirable people . i have give order that you should not be provide with either paper or ink . " 's last hope seem to be fade away . her heart sink within her , but she keep a brave face , for she do not wish him to see how his word have strike her . she have a desperate plan in her head , which would be more likely to be successful could she but put him off his guard . she spend the morning in her own little room . she have be provide with a ponderous brown bible , out of which the fly leave have be carefully cut , and this she read , though her thought often wander away from the sacred page . about one o'clock she hear the clatter of hoof and the sound of wheel on the drive . go down , she find that it be a cart which have come from with furniture . there be carpet , a chest of drawer , table , and several other article , which the driver proceed to carry upstairs , help by . the old woman be in the upper room . it seem to that she might never again have such an opportunity of carry out the resolve which she have form . she put on her bonnet , and begin to stroll listlessly about in front of the door , pick a few straggle leave from the neglected lawn . gradually she saunter away in this manner to the head of the avenue , and then , take one swift timid glance around , she slip in among the tree , and make the good of her way , half walking , half running , down the dark winding drive . oh , the joy of the moment when the great white house which have already become so hateful to her be obscure among the tree behind her ! she have some idea of the road which she have traverse the night before . behind her be all her trouble . in front the avenue gate , , and freedom . she would send both a telegram and a letter to , and explain to him her exact situation . if the kind-hearted and energetic physician once know of it , he would take care that no harm befall her . she could return then , and face with a light heart the bad which her guardian could do to her . here be the avenue entrance now , the high stone pillar , with the battered device upon the top . the iron gate between be open . with a glad cry she quicken her pace , and in another moment would have be in the , -- " now then , where be you ' to ? " cry a gruff voice from among the bush which flank the gate . the girl stop , all in a tremble . in the shadow of the tree there be a camp-stool , and on the camp-stool sit a man , dress in a dark corduroy suit , with a blacken clay pipe stick in the corner of his mouth . his weather-beaten mahogany face be plentifully cover with mark , and one of his eye be sightless and white from the effect of the same disease . he rise now , and interpose himself between her and the gate . " sink me , if it ai n't her , " he say slowly , survey her from head to foot . " i be give to understand that she be a spanker , an ' a spanker she be . " with this oracular remark he take a step back and survey again with his one eye . " my good man , " she say , in a tremble voice , for his appearance be far from reassure , " i wish to go past and to get to . here be a shilling , and i beg that you will not detain me . " her companion stretch out a very dirty hand , take the coin , spin it up in the air , catch it , bite it , and finally plunge it into the depth of his trouser pocket . " no road this way , missy , " he say ; " i have give my word to the guv'nor , and i ca n't go back from it . " " you have no right to detain me , " cry angrily . " i have good friend in who will make you suffer for this . " " she be ' to flare up , " say the one-eyed man ; " knock me helpless , if she ai n't ! " " i shall come through ! " the girl cry in desperation . she be only a dozen yard from the lane which lead to freedom , so she make a quick little feminine rush in the hope of avoid this dreadful sentinel who bar her passage . he catch her round the waist , however , and hurl her back with such violence that she stagger across the path , and would have fall have she not strike violently against a tree . as it be , she be badly bruise and the breath shake out of her body . " she have flare up , " say the one-eyed man , remove his pipe from his lip . " blow me asunder if she n't a rustler ! " he bring his camp-stool from the side of the pillar and , plant it right in the centre of the gateway , sit down upon it again . " you see , missy , " he remark , " it be no manner o ' use . if you do get out it would only be to be put in a ' . " " an asylum ! " gasp , sob with pain and anger . " do you think i be mad , then ? " " i do n't think nowt about it , " the man remark calmly . " i know it . " this be a new light to . she be so bewilder that she could hardly realize the significance of the remark . " who be you ? " she say . " why be it that you treat me in this cruel way ? " " ah , now we come to business , " he say , in a satisfied way , cross his leg , and blow great wreath from his pipe . " this be more like reason . who be i ? say you . well , my name 's , , o ' , in the county o ' . i have be an in the navy , and i have get my pension to show it . i have be in the business , second warder in the suicide ward at for two year . i have be out of a billet for some time , and he come to me and he say , ' you be , ? ' say he . ' i be , ' say ' you have have experience o ' loony ? ' say he . ' i have , ' say ' then you be the man i want , ' say he . ' you shall have a pound a week an ' nothing to do . ' ' the very crib for me , ' say ' you have get to sit at the gate , ' say he , ' and prevent a patient from ' out ! ' that be all as he say . then you come down from , an ' i come up from , and here we be , all snug an ' . so , you see , missy , it ai n't no use at all , and you will never get out this way . " " but if you let me past he will think that i run by so quickly that you could not stop me . he could not be very angry then , and i shall give you more money than you would lose . " " no , no , " say the man , shake his head energetically , " i be true to my colour , sink me , but i be ! i never be bribe yet , and never will be unless you can offer cash down instead o ' promise . you ca n't lay them by to live on in your old age . " " alas ! " cry , " i have no money except these few shilling . " " give them over here , then . " he put them in his trouser pocket beside the other one . " that be all right , missy , " he say , in a beery whisper . " i wo n't say anything now to about this job . he will be wild if he know , but mum be the word with , . ' , if this ai n't my wife ' out ' my dinner ! away with , away ! if she seed me ' to you she will tear your hair for you as like as not . she be jealous , that be what be the matter ' her . if she see a woman ' much o ' me , it be just to her , and she go for ' em straight . she be the one to make the fur fly ! away with you , i say ! " , appall by the possibility of make a new enemy , turn and retrace her step slowly and sadly up the avenue . as she glance back she see a gaunt , woman trudge up the lane with a tin can in her hand . lonely and forlorn , but not yet quite destitute of hope , she turn to the right among the tree , and push her way through bush and bramble to the boundary of the ground . it be a lofty wall , at least nine foot in height , with a coping which bristle with jagged piece of glass . walk along the base of it , her fair skin all torn and bleed with scratch from the briar , until she satisfy herself that there be no break in it . there be one small wooden door on the side which be skirt by the railway line , but it be lock and impassable . the only opening through which a human being could pass be that which be guard in the manner she have see . the sickening conviction take possession of her mind that without wing it be an utter impossibility either to get away or to give the least information to any one in the world as to where she be or what might befall her . when she come back to the house , tire and dishevel after her journey of exploration , be stand by the door to receive her with a sardonic smile upon his thin lip . " how do you like the ground , then ? " he ask , with , the near approach to hilarity which she have ever hear from him . " and the ornamental fencing ? and the ? how do you like them all ? " try for a moment to make some brave retort , but it be a useless attempt . her lip tremble , her eye fill , and , with a cry of grief and despair which might have move a wild beast , she flee to her room , and , throw herself upon her bed , burst into such scald bitter tear as few woman be ever call upon to shed . that same evening come down from . her presence be a comfort to , for though she have never like or trust the girl , yet the mere fact of have some one of her own age near her , give her a sense of security and of companionship . her room , too , have be alter for the good , and the maid be give the one next door , so that by knock on the wall she could always communicate with her . this be an unspeakable consolation , for at night the old house be so full of the sudden cracking of warp timber and the scamper of rat that entire loneliness be unendurable . apart from these uncanny sound there be other circumstance which give the priory a sinister reputation . the very aspect of the building be enough to suggest weird impression . its high white wall be blotch with patch of mildew , and in some part there be long greenish stain from roof to ground , like tear streak on the crumble plaster . indoors there be a dank graveyard smell in the low corridor and narrow . floor and ceiling be equally worm-eaten and rotten . broad flake of plaster from the wall lie litter about in the passage . the wind , too , penetrate the building through many crack and cranny , so that there be a constant sigh and sough in the big dreary room , which have a most eerie and melancholy effect . soon learn , however , that , besides these vague terror , all predispose the mind to alarm and excite the imagination , there be a general belief that another more definite cause for fear exist in the old monastery . with cruel minuteness of detail her guardian have tell her the legend which haunt those gloomy corridor . it appear that in olden time the priory have be inhabit by dominican , and that in the course of year these monk have fall away from their original state of sanctity . they preserve a name for piety among the country folk by their austere demeanour , but in secret , within the wall of their own monastery , they practise every sort of dissipation and crime . while the community be in this state of demoralization , each , from the abbot downwards , vie with the other in the number and enormity of their sin , there come a youth from a neighbour village , who beg that he might be permit to join the order . he have be attract , he say , by the fame of their sanctity . he be receive amongst them , and at first be not admit to their revel , but gradually , as his conscience be suppose to become more hardened , he be duly initiate into all their mystery . horrify by what he see , the good youth conceal his indignation until he have master all the abomination of the establishment , and then , rise up on the altar step , he denounce them in fiery , scathing word . he would leave them that night , he say , and he would tell his experience through the length and breadth of the country . incense and alarm , the friar hold a hasty meeting , and then , seize the young novice , they drag him down the cellar step and lock him up there . this same cellar have long be celebrate for the size and ferocity of the rat which inhabit it which be so fierce and strong that even during the day they have be know to attack those who enter . it be say that long into the weary hour of the night , the fearful shriek and terrible struggle of the captive , as he fight with his innumerable assailant , resound through the long corridor . " they do say that he walk about the house at time , " say , in conclusion . " no one have ever be find who would live here very long since then . but , of course , such a strong-minded young woman as you , who can even obey your own guardian , would never be frighten by such a childish idea as that . " " i do not believe in ghost , and i do n't think i shall be frighten , " answer ; but , for all that , the horrible story stick in her mind , and add another to the many terror which surround her . 's room be immediately above hers . on the second day of her imprisonment she go up on to this landing , for , have nothing to read save the bible , and no material for writing , she have little to do but to wander over the old house , and through the ground . the door of 's room be ajar , and she could not help observe as she pass that the apartment be most elegantly and comfortably furnish . so be the next room , the door of which be also open . the solid furniture and rich carpet contrast strangely with her own bare , whitewash chamber . all this point to the fact that her removal to the priory have not be a sudden impulse on the part of the old merchant , but that he have plan and arrange every detail beforehand . her refusal of be only the excuse for set the machinery in motion . what be the object , then , and what be to be the end of this subtle scheme ? that be the question which occur to her every hour of the day , and every hour the answer seem more grim and menace . there be one link in the chain which be ever hide from her . it have never occur to the girl that her fortune could be of moment to the firm . she have be so accustom to hear and his father talk glibly of million , that she depreciate her own little capital and fail to realize how important it might be in a commercial crisis . indeed , the possibility of such a crisis never enter her head , for one of her early impression be hear her father talk of the great resource of the firm and of its stability . that this firm be now in the dire strait , and that her money be absolutely essential to its existence , be thing which never for one instant enter her thought . yet that necessity be become more press every day . , in , be do all that indomitable energy and extraordinary business capacity could do to prolong the struggle . as debt become due , he would still stave off each creditor with such skill and plausibility as allay every suspicion . day by day , however , the work become more severe , and he feel that he be prop up an edifice which be so rotten that it must , sooner or later , come crumble about his ear . when he come down to the priory upon the , the young man 's haggard and anxious face show the severe ordeal which he have undergo . have already retire to her room when he arrive . she hear the sound of the trap , however , and guess who it be , even before his deep bass voice sound in the room beneath . look out of her window a little later she see him walk to and fro in the moonlight , talk earnestly to his father . it be a bitter night , and she wonder what they could have to talk about which might not be say beside the warm fire in the dining-room . they flicker up and down among the shadow for more than an hour , and then the girl hear the door slam , and shortly afterwards the heavy tread of the two man pass her chamber , and ascend to the room above . it be a momentous conversation which she have witness . in it have show his father how impossible it be to keep up appearance , and how infallible be their ruin unless help come speedily . " i do n't think any of them smell a rat , " he say . " and press for their bill in rather an ugly manner , but i talk them over completely . i take out my cheque-book . ' look here , gentleman , ' say i , ' if you wish i shall write a cheque for the amount . if i do , it will be the last piece of business which we shall do together . a great house like ours ca n't afford to be disturb in the routine of their business . ' they curl up at once , and say no more about it . it be an anxious moment though , for if they have take my offer , the whole murder would have be out . " the old man start at the word his son have use , and rub his hand together as though a sudden chill have strike through him . " do n't you think , , " he say , clutch his son 's arm , " that be a very foolish saying about ' murder will out ' ? i remember , the detective , who be a member of our church when i use to worship at , speak on this subject . he say that it be his opinion that people be be continually make away with , and that not more than one in ten be ever account for . nine chance to one , , and then those which be find out be very vulgar affair . if a man of intellect give his mind to it , there would be little chance of detection . how very cold the night be ! " " yes , " return his son . " it be good to talk of such thing in the open air , though . how have all go since you have be down here ? " " very well . she be restive the first day , and want to get to . i think that she have give it up now as a bad job . , the gatekeeper , be a very worthy fellow . " " what step have you take ? " ask , strike a fusee and light a cigar . " i have take care that they should know that she be an invalid , both at and at . they have all hear of the poor sick young lady at the priory . i have let them know also that her mind be a little strange , which account , of course , for her be keep in solitude . when it -- " " for 's sake , be quiet ! " the young man cry , with a shudder . " it be an awful job ; it wo n't bear think of . " " yes , it be a sad business ; but what else be there ? " " and how would you do it ? " ask , in a hoarse whisper . " no violence , i hope . " " it may come to that . i have other plan in my head , however , which may be try first . i think that i see one way out of it which would simplify matter . " " if there be no alternative i have a man who be ripe for any job of the sort . " " ah , who be that ? " " a fellow who can hit a good downright blow , as i can testify to my cost . his name be . he be the man who cut my head open in . i meet him in the other day , and spot him at once . he be a , poor devil , and as desperate as a man could be . he be just in the key for any business of the sort . i have get the of him now , and he know it , so that i could put him up to anything . i believe that such a job would be a positive pleasure to him , for the fellow be more like a wild beast than a man . " " sad , sad ! " exclaim . " if a man once fall away , what be there to separate him from the beast ? how can i find this man ? " " wire to me . put ' a doctor ; ' that will do as well as anything else , and will sound well at the post-office . i will see that he come down by the next train . you will well meet him at the station , for the chance be that he will be drink . " " bring him down , " say . " you must be here yourself . " " surely you can do without me ? " " no , no . we must stand or fall together . " " i have a good mind to throw the thing over , " say , stop in his walk . " it sicken me . " " what ! go back now ! " the old man cry vehemently . " no , no , that would be too craven . we have everything in our favour , and all that we want be a stout heart . oh , my boy , my boy , on the one side of you be ruin , dishonour , a sordid existence , and the scorn of your old companion ; on the other be success and riches and fame and all that can make life pleasant . you know as well as i do that the girl 's money would turn the scale , and that all would then be well . your whole future depend upon her death . we have give her every chance . she laugh at your love . it be time now to show her your hate . " " that be true enough , " say , walk on . " there be no reason why i should pity her . i have put my hand to the plough , and i shall go on . i seem to be get into your infernal knack of scripture quote . " " there be a brave , good lad , " cry his father . " it would not do to draw back now . " " you will find useful , " the young man say , " you may trust her entirely . " " you do well to send her . have they ask for me much ? " " yes . i have tell them all the same exhaustion , and doctor 's order that you be not to be disturb by any business letter . the only man who seem to smell a rat be that young . " " ah ! " cry the old man , with a chuckle ; " of course he would be surprise at our disappearance . " " he look like a madman ; ask me where you have go , and when i answer him as i have the other , storm out that he have a right to know , and that he would know . his blood be up , and there be nearly be a pretty scene before the clerk . he follow me home every evening to , and wait outside half the night through to see that i do not leave the house . " " do he , though ? " " yes ; he come after me to the station . he have a cravat round his mouth and an ulster , but i could see that it be he . i take a ticket for . he take one also , and make for the train . i give him the slip , get the right ticket , and come on . i have no doubt he be at at this moment . " " remember , my boy , " the merchant say , as they turn from the door , " this be the last of our trial . if we succeed in this , all be well for the future . " " we have try diamond , and we have try marriage . the third time be the charm , " say , as he throw away his cigar and follow his father . hardly go through the formality of greet next morning when she come down to breakfast . he be evidently ill at ease , and turn away his eye when she look at him , though he glance at her furtively from time to time . his father chat with him upon matter , but the young man 's answer be brusque and monosyllabic . his sleep have be trouble and break , for the conversation of the night before have obtrude unpleasantly on his dream . slip away from them as soon as she could and , put on her bonnet , go for a long walk through the ground , partly for the sake of exercise , and partly in the hope of find some egress . the one-eyed be at his post , and set up a hideous shout of laughter when he see her ; so she branch off among the tree to avoid him , and walk once more very carefully round the boundary wall . it be no easy matter to follow it continuously , for the briar and bramble grow in a confused tangle up to its very base . by perseverance , however , she succeed in trace every foot of it , and so satisfy herself finally that there be no diminution anywhere in its height , no break in its continuity , save the one small wooden door which be securely fasten . there be one spot , however , where a gleam of hope present itself . at an angle of the wall there stand a desert wooden shed , which have be use for the protection of gardener ' tool in the day when the ground have be keep in good order . it be not buttress up against the wall , but stand some eight or ten foot from it . beside the shed be an empty barrel which have once be a water-butt . the girl manage to climb to the top of the barrel , and from this she be easily able to gain the sloping roof of the shed . up this she clamber until she stand upon the summit , a considerable height above the ground . from it she be able to look down over the wall on to the and the railway line which lie on the other side of it . true that an impassable chasm lie between her and the wall , but it would be surely possible for her to hail passer-by from here , and to persuade some of them to carry a letter to or to bring paper from there . fresh hope gush into her heart at the thought . it be not a very secure footing , for the plank of , which the shed be compose be worm-eaten and rotten . they crack and crumble beneath her foot , but what would she not dare to see a friendly human face ? as she stand there a couple of country lout , young lad about sixteen , come stroll down the road , the one whistling and the other munch at a raw turnip . they lounge along until they come opposite to 's point of observation , when one of them look up see her pale face surmount the wall . " hey , , " he cry to his companion , " blow if the mad wench n't up on the shed over ! " " so she be ! " say the other eagerly . " give me your turnip . , an ' i will shy it at her . " " , i will shy it ' , " say the gallant ; and at the word whizz come the half of a turnip within art inch of 's ear . " you have miss her ! " shriek the other savage . " ' , quick , where be a stone ? " but before he could find one the poor girl , sick at heart , clamber down from her exposed situation . " there be no hope for me anywhere , " she sob to herself . " every man 's hand be against me . i have only one true friend , and he be far away . " she go back to her room utterly dishearten and dispirit . her guardian knock at her door before dinner time . " i trust , " he say , " that you have read over the service . it be as well to do so when you can go to church . " " and why should you prevent me from go to church ? " she ask . " ah , my lady , " he say with a sneer , " you be reap what you have sow . you be taste now , the bitter fruit of your disobedience . repent before it be too late ! " " i have do no wrong , " she say , turn on him with flash eye . " it be for you to repent , you violent and hypocritical man . it be for you to answer for your godly word and your ungodly and wicked action . there be a power which will judge between us some day , and will exact atonement for your break oath to your dead friend and for your cruel treatment of one who be leave to your care . " she speak with burning cheek and with such fearless energy that the hard man fairly cower away from her . " we will leave that to the future , " he say . " i come up to do you a kindness , and you abuse me . i hear that there be insect about the house , beetle and the like . a few drop from this bottle scatter about the room would keep them away . take care , for it be a violent though painless poison if take by a human be . " he hand her a phial , with a brownish turbid liquid in it , and a large red poison label , which she take without comment and place upon the mantelpiece . give a quick , keen glance at her as he retire . in truth he be astonish at the alteration which the last few day have make in her appearance . her cheek be colourless and sunken , save for the single hectic spot , which announce the fever within . her eye be unnaturally bright . a strange and new expression have settle upon her whole countenance . it seem to that there be every chance that his story might become a reality , and her reason be permanently derange . she have , however , more vitality than her guardian give her credit for . indeed , at the very time when he set her down in his mind as a break woman , she have form a fresh plan for escape , which it would require both energy and determination to put into execution . during the last few day she have endeavour to make friend with the maid , but the invincible aversion which the latter have entertain for her , ever since have visit her with his unwelcome attention , be not to be overcome by any advance which she could make . she perform her office with a heart full of malice , and an eye which triumph in her mistress 's misfortune . have bethink herself that , the gatekeeper , only mount guard during the day . she have observe , too , at the time of her conversation with him , that the iron gate be in such a state of disrepair that , even if it be lock , it would not be a difficult matter to scramble through or over it . if she could only gain the open air during the night there would be nothing to prevent her from make her way to , whence she could travel on to , which be only seven mile away . surely there she would find some charitable people who would communicate with her friend and give her a temporary shelter . the front door of the house be lock every night , but there be a nail behind it , on which she hope to find the key . there be another door at the back . then there be the window of the ground-floor , which might be try in case the door be too securely fasten . if only she could avoid wake any one there be no reason why she should not succeed . if the bad come to the bad and she be detect , they could not treat her more cruelly than they have already do . have go back to , so that she have only three enemy to contend against , , , and old . of these , sleep upon the floor above , and , who might have be the most dangerous of all , as her room be on the ground-floor , be fortunately so deaf that there be little risk of disturb her . the problem resolve itself , therefore , into be able to pass 's room without arouse her , and , as she know the maid to be a sound sleeper , there seem to be every chance of success . she sit at her window all that afternoon steel her mind to the ordeal before her . she be weak , poor girl , and shaken , little fit for anything which require courage and resolution . her mind run much upon her father , and upon the mother whom she have never know , but whose miniature be among her most precious treasure . the thought of them help to dispel the dreadful feeling of utter loneliness , which be the most unendurable of all her trouble . it be a cold , bright day , and the tide be in , cover the and lap up against the wall of the ground . so clear be it that she could distinguish the house at the east end of the of . when she open her window and look out she could perceive that the sea upon her right form a great inlet , dreary and dry at low tide , but look now like a broad , lake . this be , and far away at its mouth she could make out a clump of building which mark the of . there be other sign , however , of the presence of man . from her window she could see the great man-of-war steam up the , to and from the anchorage at . some be low in the water and venomous look , with bulbous turret and tiny mast . other be long and stately , with great lower hulk and broad expanse of canvas . occasionally a foreign service gunboat would pass , white and ghostly , like some tired seabird flap its way home . it be one of 's few amusement to watch the pass and of the vessel , and to speculate upon whence they have come and whither they be bind . on that eventful evening go to bed rather earlier than usual . retire to her room , and have make her final preparation and stuff her few article of jewelry into her pocket , to serve in place of money , she lie down upon her bed , and tremble at the thought of what be in front of her . down below she could hear her guardian 's shuffling step as he move about the refectory . then come the creak of the rusty lock as he secure the door , and shortly afterwards he pass upstairs to his room . have also go to bed , and all be quiet in the house . know that some hour must elapse before she could venture to make the attempt . she remember to have read in some book that the sleep of a human being be usually deep about two in the morning , so she have choose that hour for her enterprise . she have put on her strong dress and her thick shoe , but have muffle the latter in cloth , so that they should make no sound . no precaution which she could think of have be neglect . there be now nothing to be do but to spend the time as good she might until the hour of action should arrive . she rise and look out of the window again . the tide be out now , and the moon glitter upon the distant ocean . a mist be creep up , however , and even as she look it draw its veil over the water . it be bitterly cold . she shiver and her tooth begin to chatter . stretch herself upon the bed once more , she wrap the blanket round her , and , wear out with anxiety and fatigue , drop into a troubled sleep . she slumber some hour before she awake . look at her watch she find that it be after two . she must not delay any longer . with the little bundle of her more valuable possession in her hand , she give such a gasp as a diver give before he make his spring , and slip past 's door she feel her way down the wooden stair , pick her step very carefully . even in the daytime she have often notice how those old plank creak and crack beneath her weight . now , in the dead silence of the night , they emit such sound that her heart sink within her . she stop several time , convince that she must be discover , but all be hush and still . it be a relief when at last she reach the ground-floor , and be able to feel her way along the passage to the door . shake in every limb from cold and fear , she put her hand to the lock ; the key be not there . she try the nail ; there be nothing there . her wary gaoler have evidently carry it away with him to his room . would it occur to him to do the same in the case of the back door ? it be very possible that he might have overlook it . she retrace her step down the passage , pass ' room , where the old woman be snore peacefully , and begin to make her way as good she could through the great ramble building . run along the basement floor from front to back there be a long corridor , one side of which be pierce for window . at the end of this corridor be the door which she wish to reach . the moon have break through the fog , and pour its light through each opening cast a succession of silvery flicker spot upon the floor . between each of these bar of uncertain light be an interval of darkness . stand at the head of this corridor with her hand against the wall , awe by the sudden sight of the moonlight and by the weird effect which be produce by the alternate patch of shadow and brightness . as she stand there , suddenly , with eye distend with horror , she become aware that something be approach her down the corridor . she see it move as a dark formless mass at the further end . it pass through the bar of light , vanish , appear once more , lose itself in the darkness , emerge again . it be half-way down the passage and still come on . petrify with terror , she could only wait and watch . near it come and near . it be glide into the last bar of light immediately in front of her ! it be on her ! of mercy , it be a dominican friar ! the moon shine clear and cold upon his gaunt figure and his sombre robe . the poor girl throw up her hand , give one terrible scream of horror , which ring through the old house , and sink senseless to the ground . it would be impossible to describe the suspense in which live during these week . in vain he try in every manner to find some way of trace the fugitive . he wander aimlessly about from one inquiry office to another , tell his story and appeal for assistance . he advertise in paper and cross-question every one who might know anything of the matter . there be none , however , who could help him or throw any light upon the mystery . no one at the office know anything of the movement of the senior partner . to all inquiry reply that he have be order by the doctor to seek complete repose in the country . dog 's footstep night after night in the hope of gain some clue , but in vain . on the he follow him to the railway station , but , as we have see , succeed in give him the slip . his father become seriously anxious about the young fellow 's health . he eat nothing and his sleep be much break . both the old people try to inculcate patience and moderation . " that fellow , , know where they be , " would cry , stride wildly up and down the room with unkempt hair and clench hand . " i will have his secret , if i have to tear it out of him . " " steady , lad , steady ! " the doctor reply to one of these outburst . " there be nothing to be gain by violence . they be on the right side of the law at present , and you will be on the wrong if you do anything rash . the girl could have write if she be uncomfortable . " " ah , so she could . she must have forget us . how could she , after all that have pass ! " " let us hope for the good , let us hope for the good , " the doctor would say soothingly . yet it must be confess that he be considerably stagger by the turn which thing have take . he have see so much of the world in his professional capacity that he have become a very reliable judge of character . all his instinct tell him that be a true-hearted and girl . it be not in her nature to leave and never to send a single line to her friend to tell them where or why she have go . there must , he be sure , be some good reason for her silence , and this reason resolve itself into one or two she be ill and unable to hold a pen , or she have lose her freedom and be restrain from write to them . the last supposition seem to the doctor to be the more serious of the two . have he know the instability of the firm , and the necessity they be under of get ready money , he would at once have hold the key to the enigma . he have no idea of that , but in spite of his ignorance he be deeply distrustful of both father and son . he know and have often deplore the clause in 's will by which the ward 's money revert to the guardian . forty thousand pound be a bait which might tempt even a wealthy man into crooked path . it be third since and his ward have disappear . have fully make up his mind that , go where he would , should not escape him this time . on two consecutive saturday the young merchant have manage to get away from him , and have be absent each time until the morning . know , and the thought be a bitter one , that these day be spend in some unknown retreat in the company of and of her guardian . this time at least he should not get away without reveal his destination . the two young man remain in the office until two o'clock . then put on his hat and overcoat , button it up close , for the weather be bitterly cold . at once pick up his wide-awake and follow him out into , so close to his heel that the swing door have not shut on the one before the other pass through . glance round at him when he hear the footstep , and give a snarl like an angry dog . there be no longer any pretence of civility between the two , and whenever their eye meet it be only to exchange glance of hatred and defiance . a hansom be pass down the street , and , with a few mutter word to the driver , spring in . fortunately another have just discharge its fare , and be still wait by the curb . run up to it . " keep that red cab in sight , " he say . " whatever you do , do n't let it get away from you . " the driver , who be a man of few word , nod and whip up his horse . it chance that this same horse be either a fast or a fresh one than that which bear the young merchant . the red cab rattle down , then double on its track , and come back by be plunge into a labyrinth of side street , from which it eventually emerge upon the . in spite of all its effort , however , it be unable to shake off its pursuer . the red cab journey on down the embankment and across one of the bridge , 's able charioteer still keep only a few yard behind it . among the narrow street on the side 's vehicle pull up at a low . 's drive on a hundred yard or so , and then stop where he could have a good view of whatever occur . have jump out and enter the . wait patiently outside until he should reappear . his movement hitherto have puzzle him completely . for a moment the wild hope come into his head that might be conceal in this strange hiding-place , but a little reflection show him the absurdity and impossibility of the idea . he have not long to wait . in a very few minute young come out again , accompany by a tall , burly man , with a bushy red beard , who be miserably dress , and appear to be somewhat the bad for drink . he be help into the cab by , and the pair drive off together . be more bewilder than ever . who be this fellow , and what connexion have he with the matter on hand ? like a sleuth-hound the pursue hansom thread its way through the torrent of vehicle which pour down the street , never for one moment lose sight of its quarry . presently they wheel into the , close to the . the red cab turn sharp round and rattle up the incline which lead to the main line . spring out , toss a sovereign to the driver , and follow on foot at the top of his speed . as he run into the station and the red-bearded stranger be immediately in front of him . there be a great swarm of people all around , for , as it be , there be special train to the country . be afraid of lose sight of the two man in the crowd , so he elbow his way through as quickly as he could , and get immediately behind close that he could have touch them with his hand . they be approach the , when glance round and see his rival standing behind him . he give a bitter curse , and whisper something to his companion . the latter turn , and with an inarticulate cry , like a wild beast , rush at the young man and seize him by the throat with his brawny hand . it be one thing , however , to catch a man by the throat , and another to retain that grip , especially when your antagonist happen to be an football player . to this red-bearded rough , who charge him so furiously , be nothing more than the thousand of bull-headed forward who have come upon him like in the day of old . with the ease beget by practice he circle his assailant with his long muscular arm , and give a quick convulsive jerk in which every sinew of his body participate . the red-bearded man 's stumpy leg describe a in the air , and he come down on the stone pavement with a sound crash which shake every particle of breath from his enormous body . 's fight blood be all aflame now , and his grey eye glitter with a joy as he make at . all the caution of his father and the exhortation of his mother be cast to the wind as he see his enemy standing before him . to do him justice , be nothing loth , but spring forward to meet him , hit with both hand . they be well match , for both be train boxer and exceptionally powerful man . be perhaps the strong , but be in good condition . there be a short eager and guard and counter so quick and hard that the eye could hardly follow it . then a rush of railway servant and bystander tear them asunder . have a red flush on his forehead where a blow have fall , be spit out the fragment of a break tooth , and bleed profusely . each struggle furiously to get at the other , with the result that they be drag farther apart . eventually a burly policeman seize by the collar , and hold him as in a vice . " where be he ? " cry , crane his neck to catch a glimpse of his enemy . " he will get away after all . " " ca n't ' that , " say the guardian of the peace phlegmatically . " a like you ought to be ashamed . keep quiet now ! would , then ! " this last at some specially energetic effort on the part of the prisoner to recover his freedom . " they will get away ! i know they will ! " cry in despair , for both and his companion , who be none other than , of african notoriety , have disappear from his sight . his fear prove to be only too well found , for when at last he succeed in wrest himself from the constable 's clutch he could find no trace of his enemy . a dozen bystander give a dozen different account of their movement . he rush from one platform to another over all the great station . he could have tear his hair at the thought of the way in which he have allow them to slip through his finger . it be fully an hour before he finally abandon the search , and acknowledge to himself that he have be hoodwink for the third time , and that a long week would elapse before he could have another chance of solve the mystery . he turn at last sadly and reluctantly away from the station , and walk across to , brood over all that have occur , and curse himself for his stupidity in allow himself to be draw into a vulgar brawl , when he might have attain his end so much well by quiet observation . it be some consolation , however , that he have have one fair crack at . he glance down at his knuckle , which be raw and bleeding , with a mixture of satisfaction and disgust . with half a smile he put his injured hand in his pocket , and look up once more become aware that a red-faced gentleman be approach him in a highly excited manner . it could not be say that the red-faced gentleman walk , neither could it be say that the red-faced gentleman run . his mode of progression might good be describe as a succession of short and unwieldy jump , which , as he be a rather stout gentleman , appear to indicate some very urgent and pressing need for hurry . his face be bath in perspiration , and his collar have become flaccid and shapeless from the same cause . it appear to , as he gaze at those rubicund , though anxious , feature , that they should be well know to him . that glossy hat , those speckless gaiter , and the long frock-coat , surely they could belong to none other than the gallant , late of her majesty be of the line ? as the old soldier approach , he quicken his pace , so that when he eventually come up with him he could only puff and pant and hold out a soil letter . " read ! " he manage to ejaculate . open the letter and glance his eye over the content , with a face which have turn as pale as the major 's be red . when he finish it he turn without a word , and begin to run in the direction from which he have come , the major following as quickly as his breath would permit . when come to herself after the terrible incident which frustrate her attempt at escape , she find herself in bed in her own little room . by the light which shine in through the window she know that it must be well on in the day . her head be throb violently , and she be so weak that she could hardly raise herself in bed . when she look round she find that have bring a chair in from her room and be sit by the fire . at the sound of her movement the maid glance up and perceive that her mistress have recover consciousness . " ' bless me ! " she cry , " you have give us a pretty fright . we think you be n't come back to your sense no more . you have be ' there since the middle of the night , and now it be close on to twelve o'clock . " lie silent for some little time , put together all that have occur . " oh , , " she say at last , shiver at the recollection , " i have see the most dreadful sight . either i be go mad , or i have see a ghost . " " we think you be a ghost yourself , " say the girl reproachfully . " what with the ' and you lie so white in the middle of the passage , it be enough to make any one have ' air turn grey . , he lift you up , an ' carry you back into your room . he be cut to the heart , the good gentleman , when he see what you have be after , ' to give him the slip . " " oh , this dreadful house will kill will kill me ! " moan . " i can stay in it any longer . what shall i do ? oh , , , what shall i do ? " the maid come across with a simper upon her pretty , vulgar face , and sit on the side of the bed . " what be the matter , then ? " she ask . " what be it that you have see ? " " i have , , it be too dreadful to talk of . i have see that poor monk who be kill in the cellar . it be not fancy . i see him as plainly as i see you now , with his tall thin figure , and long loose gown , and the brown cowl draw over his face . " " preserve us ! " cry nervously , glance over her shoulder . " it be enough to give one the creeps . " " i pray that i may never see such a sight again . oh , , if you have the heart of a woman , help me to get away from this place . they mean that i should never go from it alive . i have read it in my guardian 's eye . he long for my death . do , do tell me what i should do for the good . " " i be surprise at you ! " the maid say with dignity . " when and be so good to you , and provide you with a country-house and every convenience as ' could wish , all you can find to do be to go ' about at night , and then talk as if you be ' to be murder in the day . i really be surprise . there be . ' he will be shocked , poor gentleman , if he know how you be ' of him . " 's face assume an expression of virtuous indignation as she sweep out of the room , but her black eye shine with the unholy light of cruelty and revenge . leave to herself , rise and dress as well as her weakness would permit . her nerve be so shake that she start at the least sound , and she could hardly recognize the poor pale face which she see in the glass as her own . she have scarcely finish her toilet before her guardian come up into her room . " you be good , then ? " he say . " i be very ill , " she answer gently . " no wonder , after rush about the corridor in that absurd fashion in the dead of the night . tell me that you imagine you meet with some apparition . you be cry . be you so unhappy , then ? " " very , very miserable , " answer , sink her face upon her hand . " ah , " say softly , " it be only in some high life that we shall find entire peace and contentment . " his voice have alter , so that a little warm spring of hope begin to rise in the girl 's heart , that perhaps the sight of her many misery be begin to melt this iron man . " beyond the grave be rest , " he continue , in the same gentle tone . " it have seem to me sometimes that if it be not for the duty which i have to perform in this world , and the many who be dependent upon me , i should be tempt to shorten my existence in order to attain the peace which be to come . some precisian have pronounce it to be sinful to cut the thread of life . for my part i have never think it so , and yet my view of moral have be a strict one . i hold that of all thing in this world one 's life be the thing which belong most entirely to one 's self , and may therefore most freely be terminate when it seem good to us . " he pick up the phial from the mantelpiece and gaze thoughtfully at it . " how strange , " he say , " to think that within the compass of this tiny bottle lie a cure for every earthly evil ! one draught and the body slip off like a garment , while the soul walk forth in all its beauty and freedom . trouble be over . one draught , , let go , i say ! what have you do ? " have snatch the bottle from him , and with a quick feminine gesture have hurl it against the wall , where it splinter to piece , send a strong odour through the apartment . her strength be so impair that she stagger back after this feat , and sit down on the side of the bed , while her guardian , grim and threatening , stand over her with his long , bony finger open and shut , as though he find it difficult to keep them from her throat . " i will not help you in it , " she say , in a low but firm voice . " you would kill my soul as well . " the mask have fairly drop from . no gaunt old wolf could have glare down with fierce eye or a more cruel mouth . " you fool ! " he hiss . " i be not afraid to die , " she say , look up at him with brave , steadfast eye . recover his self-possession by an effort . " it be clear to me , " he say calmly , " that your reason be unhinge . what be all this nonsense about death ? there be nothing that will harm you except your own evil action . " he turn abruptly and stride out of the room with the firm and decide step of a man who have take an irrevocable resolution . with a set and rigid face he ascend the step which lead to his bedroom , and , rummage in his desk , produce a telegram form . this he fill up and take with him downstairs . there he put on his hat and start off to the at full speed . at the avenue gate he meet his sentinel , who be sit on his camp stool as grim as ever . " she be very bad , , " say , stop and jerk his head in the direction of the house . " she be go downhill . i be afraid that she ca n't last long . if any one ask you about her , you can say that she be despair of . i be just send off a telegram to a doctor in , so that she may have the good advice . " touch his cap as a token of respect . " she be down here ' outrageous the other day , " say he . " ' let me pass , ' say she , ' and you shall have ten golden guinea . ' be her very word . ' not for ten hundred golden guinea , ' i answer , ' would , , do what he do n't ought to . ' " " very proper , very proper indeed , " say approvingly . " every man in his own station have his own duty to fulfil , and he will be judge as he have fulfill them , well or ill . i shall see that you be no loser by your staunchness . " " thank , guv'nor . " " she be wild and delirious , and can get about in spite of her low state of health . it be possible that she may make some effort to get away , so be vigilant . good day to you . " " good day , sir . " stand at the gate , look pensively after his employer ; then he reseat himself upon his camp-stool , and , light his pipe , resume his meditation . " i ca n't make nought of it , " he mutter , scratch his head , " it do seem uncommon queer , to be sure . the boss he say , ' she be very low , ' say he , and then next minute he say , ' she may be ' down and ' to escape . ' i have see o ' all shape and size , but i have never seed one as go a ' about like least , not among them as die a death . it do seem uncommon strange . then , again , he be off ' for a doctor to , when there be , o ' , or , o ' , would come quick enough if he want them . i ca n't make no sense of it . why , bust my button ! " he continue , take his pipe out of his mouth in a paroxysm of astonishment , " if here hai n't the herself ! " it be , indeed , , who , learn that her guardian be go , have come out with some vague idea of make a last struggle for her life and freedom . with the courage of despair , she come straight down the avenue to the sole spot where escape seem possible . " good ' , missy , " cry , as she approach . " you do n't look extra bright this ' , but you ai n't as bad as your good guardian make me think . you do n't seem to feel no difficulty in ' about . " " there be nothing the matter with me , " the girl answer earnestly . " i assure you there be not . my mind be as sound as yours . " " that be what they all say , " say the with a chuckle . " but it be so . i can stay in that house longer . i can , , i can ! it be haunt , and my guardian will murder me . he mean to . i read it in his eye . he as good as try this morning . to die without one word to those i any explanation of what have would give a sting to death . " " well , if this ai n't ! " cry the one-eyed man ; " perfectly ! go to murder you , say you ! what be he ' to do that for ? " " know ! he hate me for some reason . i have never go against his wish , save in one respect , and in that i can never obey him , for it be a matter in which he have no right to command . " " quite so ! " say , wink his one eye . " i know the feeling myself , cuss me , but i do ! ' for once and thine for never , ' as the song say . " " why wo n't you let me pass ? " plead . " you may have have daughter of your own . what would you do if they be treat as i have be ? if i have money you should have it , but i have none . do , do let me go ! will reward you for it . perhaps when you be on your last bed of sickness the memory of this one good deed may outweigh all the evil that you have do . " " ' , do n't she speak ! " say , appeal confidentially to the near tree . " it be like a dictionary . " " and you wo n't lose by it in this life , " the girl add eagerly . " see , here be my watch and my chain . you shall have that if you will let me through ? " " let be see it . " he open it and examine it critically . " eighteen be only a , though . what can you expect for a ? " " and you shall have fifty pound when i get back to my friend . do let me pass , good , for my guardian may return at any moment . " " see here , miss , " say solemnly ; " be , and if every hair of your ' be tag ' a jewel , and you offer to make me your barber , i would n't let you through that gate . as to this ' ere watch , if so be as you would like to write a line to your friend , i will post it for you at in exchange for it , though it be only a . " " you good , kind man ! " cry , all excitement and delight . " i have a pencil in my pocket . what shall i do for paper ? " she look eagerly round and spy a small piece which lie among the brushwood . with a cry of joy she pick it out . it be very coarse and very dirty , but she manage to scrawl a few line upon it , describe her situation and ask for aid . " i will write the address upon the back , " she say . " when you get to you must buy an envelope and ask the post-office people to copy the address on to it . " " i bargain to post it for the , " he say . " i do n't bargain to buy envelope and copy address . that be a nice of . now i will make a clean job of it if you will throw that in . " hand it over without a murmur . at last a small ray of light seem to be find its way through the darkness which have so long surround her . put the watch and in his pocket , and take the little scrap of paper on which so much depend . as hand it to him she see over his shoulder that come up the lane be a small , in which sit a buxom lady and a very small page . the sleek little brown pony which draw it amble along at a methodical pace which show that it be entirely master of the situation , while the whole turnout have an indescribable air of comfort and good nature . have be so separate from her kind that the sight of people who , if not friendly , be at least not hostile to her , send a thrill of pleasure into her heart . there be something wholesome and prosaic too about this homely equipage , which be soothe to a mind so wear by successive terror . " here be some one ' , " cry . " clear out from be the governor 's order . " " oh , do let me stay and say one word to the lady ! " seize his great stick savagely . " clear out ! " he cry in a hoarse , angry voice , and make a step towards her as if he would strike her . she shrink away from him , and then , a sudden thought seize her , she turn and run through the wood as fast as her feeble strength would allow . the instant that she be out of sight , very deliberately and carefully tear up the little slip of paper with which she have entrust him , and scatter the piece to the wind . flee as quickly as she could through the wood , stumble over the bramble and crash through the briar , regardless of pain or scratch or anything else which could stand between her and the possibility of safety . she soon gain the shed and manage to mount on to the top of it by the aid of the barrel . crane her neck , she could see the long dusty lane , with the bare wither hedge upon either side , and the dreary line of the railway embankment beyond . there be no in sight . she hardly expect that there would be , for she have take a short cut , and the carriage would have to go some distance round . the road along which it be travel run at right angle to the one which she be now overlook , and the chance be equal as to whether the lady would turn round or go straight on . in the latter case , it would not be possible for her to attract her attention . her heart seem to stand still with anxiety as she peer over the high wall at the spot where the two road cross . presently she hear the rattle of wheel , and the brown pony trot round the corner . the carriage draw up at the end of the lane , and the driver seem to be uncertain how to proceed . then she shake the rein , and the pony lumber on along the road . give a cry of despair and the last ray of hope die away from her heart . it chance , however , that the page in the carriage be just at that happy age when the sense be keen and on the alert . he hear the cry , and glance round he see through a break in the hedge that a lady be look over the wall which skirt the lane they have pass . he mention the fact to his mistress . " maybe we will well go back , ma'am , " he say . " maybe we will well not , , " say the buxom lady . " people can look over their garden wall without our interfere with them , ca n't they ? " " yes , ma'am , but she be ' at us . " " no , , be she though ? maybe this be a private road and we have no right to be on it . " " she give a holler as if some one be ' of her , " say with decision . " then we will go back , " say the lady , and turn the pony round . hence it come about that just as be descend with a sad heart from her post of observation , she be electrify to see the brown pony reappear and come trot round the curve of the lane , with a rapidity which be altogether foreign to that quadruped 's usual habit . indeed , the girl turn so very white at the sight , and her face assume such an expression of relief and delight , that the lady who be approach saw at once that it be no common matter which have cause her to summon them . " what be it , my dear ? " she cry , pull up when she come abreast of the place . her good , kind heart be touch already by the plead expression upon the girl 's sweet face . " oh , madam , whoever you may be , " say , in a low , rapid voice , " i believe have send you here this day . i be shut up in these ground , and shall be murder unless help come . " " be murder ! " cry the lady in the , drop back in her seat and raise her hand in astonishment . " it be only too true , " say , try to speak concisely and clearly so as to enforce conviction , but feel a choke sensation about her throat , as though an hysterical attack be impending . " my guardian have shut me up here for some week , and i firmly believe that he will never let me out alive . oh , do n't , pray do n't think me mad ! i be as sane as you be , though , know , what i have go through have be enough to shake my reason . " this last appeal of 's be in answer to an expression of incredulity and doubt which have pass over the face of the lady below . it be successful in its object , for the ring of truth with which she speak and the look of anxiety and terror upon her face be too genuine to be mistake . the lady draw her rein so as to bring the carriage as near the wall as be possible without lose sight of 's face . " my dear , " she say , " you may safely tell me everything . whatever i can do to help you shall be do , and where i be powerless there be other who be my friend and may be of assistance . be my -- , of . do n't cry , my poor girl , but tell me all about it , and let us see how we can put matter right . " thus encourage , wipe away the tear which have be bring to her eye by the unwonted sound of a friendly voice . lean forward as far as she could , and prevent herself from fall by pass her arm round a great branch which shoot across the top of the shed , she give in as few word as she could a detailed account of all that have befall her . she describe her guardian 's anxiety that she should marry his son , her refusal , their sudden departure from , their life at the , the manner in which she be cut off from all human aid , and the reason which make her believe that an attempt would be make upon her life . in conclusion , she narrate the scene which have occur that very morning , when her guardian have tempt her to commit suicide . the only incident which she omit from her story be that which have occur the night before , for she feel that it might put too severe a tax upon 's credulity . indeed , look back at it , she almost persuade herself that the sight which she have see might be some phantom conjure up by her own imagination , weaken as she be in mind and in body . have conclude her narrative , she wind up by implore her new-found friend to assist her by let her friend in know what have become of her and where she be . listen with a face which express alternately the most profound pity and the most burning indignation . when have finish , she sit silent for a minute or more entirely absorb in her own thought . she switch her whip up and down viciously , and her usually placid countenance assume an expression so fierce that , look down at her , fear that she have give her offence . when she look up at last , however , she smile so pleasantly that the poor girl be reassure , and feel instinctively that she have really find a true and effective friend at last . " we must act promptly , " she say , " for we do n't know what they may be about , or what their plan be for the future . who do you say your friend be ? " " , of , . " " have n't he get a grown-up son ? " " yes , " say , with a slight flush on her pale cheek . " ah ! " cry the good lady , with a very roguish smile . " i see how the land lie . of course , of course , why should n't it ? i remember hearing about that young man . i have hear about the also . african merchant they be in the . you see i know all about you . " " you know ? " cry in astonishment . " oh , do n't let us get talk of , " say good-humouredly . " when girl get on a subject of that sort there be an end to everything . what i want now be business . in the first place i shall drive down to , and i shall send to . " " bless you ! " ejaculate . " but not to . hot-headed young man do foolish thing under such circumstance as these . this be a case that want careful management . i know a gentleman in who be just the man , and who i know would be only too proud to help a lady in distress . he be a retired officer , and his name be . " " oh , i know him very well , and i have hear of you , too , " say , with a smile . " i remember your name now in connection with his . " it be 's turn to blush now . " never mind that , " she say . " i can trust the major , and i know he will be down here at a word from me . i shall let him have the fact , and he can tell the if he think it well . good-bye , dear ; do n't be unhappy any more , but remember that you have friend outside who will very quickly set all right . good-bye ! " and wave her hand in encouragement , the good widow wake up the pony , which have fall fast asleep , and rattle away down the lane in the direction from which she have come . at four o'clock step into the telegraph office and wire his short message . it run thus : " case hopeless . come on with a doctor . " on receipt of this he know by their agreement that his son would come down , bring with him the man of violence whom he have speak of at their last interview . there be nothing for it now but that his ward should die . if he delay longer , the crash might come before her money be available , and then how vain all regret would be . it seem to him that there be very little risk in the matter . the girl have have no communication with any one . even of those around her , be in her dotage , be staunch and true , and know nothing . every one on the country side have hear of the invalid young lady at the priory . who would be surprise to hear that she have pass away ? he dare not call in any local medical man , but his inventive brain have overcome the difficulty , and have hit upon a device by which he might defy both doctor and coroner . if all go as he have plan it , it be difficult to see any chance of detection . in the case of a poor man the fact that the girl 's money revert to him might arouse suspicion , but he rightly argue that with his great reputation no one would ever dream that such a consideration could have weight with him . have send the telegram off , and so take a final step , feel more at his ease . he be proud of his own energy and decision . as he walk very pompously and gravely down the village street , his heart glow within him at the thought of the long struggle which he have maintain against misfortune . he pass over in his mind all the successive borrowing and speculation and makeshift and ruse which the firm have resort to . yet , in spite of every danger and difficulty , it still hold up its head with the good , and would weather the storm at last . he reflect proudly that there be no other man in the who would have have the dogged tenacity and the grim resolution which he have display during the last twelve month . " if ever any one should put it all in a book , " he say to himself , " there be few who would believe it possible . it be not by my own strength that i have do it . " the man have no consciousness of blasphemy in him as he revolve this thought in his mind . he be as thoroughly in earnest as be any of those religious fanatic who , throughout history , have burn , sack , and destroy , commit every sin under heaven in the name of a of peace and of mercy . when he be half-way to the priory he meet a small , which be rattle towards at a great pace , drive by a good-looking middle-aged lady with a small page by her side . the merchant encounter this equipage in a narrow country lane without a footpath , and as it approach him he could not help observe that the lady wear an indignant and gloomy look upon her feature which be out of keep with their general contour . her forehead be contract into a very decide frown , and her lip be gather into what might be describe as a negative smile . stand aside to let her pass , but the lady , by a sudden twitch of her right-hand rein , bring the wheel across in so sudden a manner that they be within an ace of go over his toe . he only save himself by spring back into a gap of the hedge . as it be , he find on look down that his pearl grey trouser be cover with flake of wet mud . what make the incident more perplex be that both the middle-aged lady and the page laugh very heartily as they rattle away to the village . the merchant proceed on his way marvel in his heart at the and innate wickedness of human nature . good little dream of the urgency of the case . have she see the telegram which have just despatch , it be conceivable that she might have read between the word , and by act more promptly have prevent a terrible crime . as a matter of fact , with all her sympathy the worthy woman have take a large part of 's story with the proverbial grain of salt . it seem to her to be incredible and impossible that in this nineteenth century such a thing as deliberate and carefully planned murder should occur in . that these thing occur in the abstract we be ready to admit , but we find it very difficult to realize that they may come within the horizon of our own experience . hence set no importance upon 's fear for her life , and put them down to the excited state of the girl 's imagination . she do consider it , however , to be a very iniquitous and unjustifiable thing that a young girl should be coop up and separate from all the world in such a very dreary place of seclusion as the priory . this consideration and nothing more serious have set that look of wrath upon her pleasant face , and have stir her up to frustrate and to communicate with 's friend . her intention have be to telegraph to , but as she drive to she bethink her how impossible it would be for her within the limit of a telegram to explain to her satisfaction all that she want to express . a letter , she reflect , would , if post now , reach the major by the first post on morning . it would simply mean a few hour ' delay in the taking of step to relieve , and what difference could a few hour more or less make to the girl . she determine , therefore , that she would write to the major , explain all the circumstance , and leave it to him what course of action should be pursue . be well know at the post office , and they quickly accommodate her with the requisite for correspondence . within a quarter of an hour she have write , seal , stamp , and post the follow epistle : -- - " , " i be afraid you must find your period of probation very slow . poor boy ! what do he do ? no billiards , no card , no -- how do he manage to get through the day at all ? smoke , i suppose , and look out of the window , and tell all his grievance to . be n't you sorry that ever you make the acquaintance of 's second floor front ? ! " who do you think i have come across down here ? no less a person than that who be 's ward . you use to talk about her , i remember , and indeed you be a great admirer of hers . you would be surprise if you see her now , so thin and worn and pale . still her face be very sweet and pretty , so i wo n't deny your good could i after you have pay your address to me ? " her guardian have bring her down here and have lock her up in a great bleak house call the priory . she have no one to speak to , and be not allow to write letter . she seem to be because none of her friend know where she be , and she fear that they may imagine that she have willingly desert them . of course , by her friend she mean that that you speak of . the poor girl be in a very low nervous state , and tell me over the wall of the park that she fear her guardian have design on her life . i can hardly believe that , but i do think that she be far from well , and that it be enough to drive her mad to coop her up like that . we must get her out somehow or another . i suppose that her guardian be within his right , and that it be not a police matter . you must consider what must be do , and let young know if you think well . he will want to come down to see her , no doubt , and if be to come too i should not be sorry . " i should have telegraph about it , but i could not explain myself sufficiently . i assure you that the poor girl be in a very bad way , and we ca n't be too energetic in what we do . it be very sad to hear the positive manner in which she declare that her guardian would murder her , though she do not attempt to give any reason why he should commit such a terrible crime . we see a horrid one-eyed man at the gate , who appear to be on guard to prevent any one from come out or in . on our way to we meet no less a person than the great himself , and we actually drive so clumsily that we splash him all over with mud . be n't that a very sad and unaccountable thing ? i fancy i see smile over that . " good-bye , my dear lad . be as good as you can . i know you have get rather out of the way of it , but practice work wonder . " ever yours , " . " it happen that on the morning on which this missive come to , have not go to the . the major have just perform his toilet and be march up and down with a cigarette in his mouth and the in his hand , descant fluently , as be the habit of old soldier , on the favouritism of the and the deterioration of the service . " look at this fellow ! " he cry excitedly , slap the paper with one , hand , while he crumple it up with the other . " they have make him ! the booby in the regiment , sir ! a fellow who have see no service and never hear a shot fire in anger . they promote him on the of a sham fight , ! he command a force operate along the and oppose an invade army that be advance from . do hear such infernal nonsense in your life ? and there be , and , and , and a dozen more i could , that have volunteer for everything since the sikh war of ' @card@ , all , ! the be go straight to the . " " be a very bad look-out for the devil , " say , fill up a cup of coffee . the major continue to stride angrily about the room . " that be why we have a satisfactory campaign with a european foe , " he break out . " our success be always half and half , and lead to nothing . yet we have the fine raw material and the great individual fight power and of any army in the world . " " always , of course , not count army of his most majesty , " say , with his mouth full of toast . " here be girl mit a letter . let us hope it be my money . " " two to one it be for me . " " ah , he must not bet ! " cry , with upraise finger . " you have right , though . it be for you , and from proper quarter too , i think . " it be the letter which we have already quote . the major break the seal and read it over very carefully , after which he read it again . , watch him across the table , see a very anxious and troubled look upon his ruddy face . " i hope be nothing wrong mit my good , madame ? " he remark at last . " no , nothing wrong with her . there be with some one else , though ; " and with that he read to his companion all that part of his letter which refer to . " be no joke at all , " the german remark ; and the two sit for some little time lose in thought , the major with the letter still lie open upon his knee . " what think of it ? " he ask at last . " i think it be a more bad thing than the good madame seem to think . i think if say intend to kill her , it be very likely he have intention " " , he be not a man to stick at , " the major say , rub his chin reflectively . " here be a nice kettle of fish ! what the deuce could cause him to do such a thing ? " " money , of course . i have tell you , my good , since a year de firm have be in a very bad way indeed . it be not generally know , but i know it , and so do other . girl , i have hear , have money which would come to old man in case of her death . it be as plain as on my hand . " " be , the thing look very ugly ! " say the major , pace up and down the room . " i believe that fellow and his beauty of a son be game for anything . take the too lightly . fancy any one being such a as to lay a hand on that dear girl , though . , , it make drop of blood in me body tingle in me vein ! " " my dear , " answer , " it be very good of your blood for to tingle , but i do not see how will help the mee . let us be practical , and make up our brain what we should do . " " i must find young at once . he have a right to know . " " yes , i should find him . be no doubt that you and he should at once start off for place . i know young man . be no hold him at all when he have hear of it . you must go too , to prevent him from do , and also because good madame have say so in her letter . " " certainly . we shall go down . one of us will manage to see the young lady and find out if she assistance . , if she do , she shall have it , guardian or no guardian . if we do n't whip her out in a brace of shake me name be not . " " you must remember , " remark , " people be desperate . if dey intend to murder a dey certainly not stick at a man or two man . you have no knowledge of how many may be . be certainly and his son and de man mit de eye , but madame know not how many may be at house . remember also de police be not on your side , but rather against you , for as yet be no evidence any crime be intentioned . you think of all i be sure you agree with me it would be to take mit you two or tree man would stick by you through thin and broad . " the major be so busy in make his preparation for departure that he could only signify by a nod that he agree with his friend 's remark . " what man could i git ? " he ask . " be i myself , " say the german , count upon his big red finger , " and be some of our society who would very gladly come on such an errand , and be man who be altogether to be rely upon . be little , of , and a russian man whose name i disremember , but he be a good man . he vas a nihilist at , and be sentence to death suppose they could him catch . be other as good , but it might take me time to find . two i can very easily get . be live together , and have neither of nothing to do . " " bring them , then , " say the major . " git a cab and run them down to . that be the one for . i will bring down with me and mate you there . in me opinion there be no time to be lose . " the major be ready to start , so throw on his coat and hat , and pick out a thick stick from a rack in the corner . " we may need something of sort , " he say . " i have me derringer , " the soldier answer . they leave the house together , and drive off to the , where his political friend reside . the major call a cab and rattle away to and thence to the office , without be able to find the man of whom he be in search . he then rush down the as quickly as he could , intend to catch the next train and go alone , but on his way to he fall in with , as record in a preceding chapter . the letter be a thunderbolt to , in his bad dream he have never imagine anything so dark as this . he hurry back to the station at such a pace that the poor major be reduce to a most and wheezy condition . he trot along pluckily , however , and as he go hear the account of 's adventure in the morning and of the departure of and of his red-bearded companion . the major 's face grow more anxious still when he hear of it . " we may not be too late ! " he pant . when have make a clean breast of all her trouble to the widow , and have secure that good woman 's co-operation , a great weight seem to have be lift from her heart , and she spring from the shed a different woman . it would soon be like a dream , all these dreary week in the grim old house . within a day she be sure that either or the major would find mean of communicate with her . the thought make her so happy that the colour steal back into her cheek , and she sing for very lightness of heart as she make her way back to the priory . and observe the change which have come over her and marvel at it . attempt to aid the former in her household work , but the old crone refuse her assistance and repulse her harshly . her maid too answer her curtly when she address her , and eye her in anything but a friendly manner . " you do n't seem much the bad , " she remark , " for all the wonderful thing you seed in the night . " " oh , do n't speak of it , " say . " i be afraid that i have give you a great fright . i be feel far from well , and i suppose that i must have imagine all about that dreadful monk . yet , at the time , i assure you that i see it as plainly as i see you now . " " what be that she say ? " ask , with her hand to her ear . " she say that she see a ghost last night as plain as she see you now . " " pack of nonsense ! " cry the old woman , rattle the poker in the grate . " i have be here afore she alone in the house , i hai n't see nothing of the sort . when she 's get nothing else to grumble about she pretend as she have see a ghost . " " no , no , " the girl say cheerily . " i be not i be not . " " it be like her contrariness to say so , " old cry hoarsely . " she be always ' . " " you be not in a good temper , " remark , and go off to her room , go up the step two at a time with her old springy footstep . follow her , and notice the change , interpret it in her own narrow fashion . " you seem cheerful enough now , " she say , stand at 's door and look into her room , with a bitter smile on her lip . " be . that be what be the matter with you . " " ! " repeat in astonishment . " yes ; you know what i mean well enough . it be no use pretend that you do n't . " the girl 's manner be so aggressive that be astonish . " i have n't the least idea of what you mean , " she say . " oh no , " cry , with her arm akimbo and a sneer on her face . " she do n't know what i mean . she do n't know that her young man be come down on the . she do not know that come all the way from on that day just for to see her . it be n't that that make you cheerful , be it ? oh , you double face ! " the girl 's pretty feature be all distort with malice as she speak , and her two hand be clench passionately . " ! " cry energetically , " i really think that you be the most complete fool that ever i meet in my life . i will trouble you to remember that i be your mistress and you be my servant . how dare you speak to me in such a way ? leave my room this instant ! " the girl stand her ground as though she intend to brazen it out , but sweep towards her with so much honest anger in her voice , and such natural dignity in her bearing , that she sink her bold gaze , and with a few mutter word slink away into her own room . close the door behind her , and then , her sense of the ludicrous overpower her anger , she laugh for the first time since she have be in the priory . it be so intensely ridiculous that even the most foolish of mortal should imagine that she could , under any circumstance , be desirous of see . the very think of him bring her amusement to an end , for the maid be right , and would bring him down once more . perhaps her friend might arrive before he do . grant it ! it be a cold but a bright day . from her window she could see the snow-white sail of the dip and rise against the deep blue sea . a single barque ride amongst them , like a swan among duckling , beat up against the wind for or . away on the right be the long line of white foam which mark the . the tide be in and the great have disappear , save that here and there their convexity rise above the surface like the back of a sleeping leviathan . overhead a great flock of wild goose be flap their way southward , like a broad arrow against the sky . it be an exhilarate , brace scene , and accord well with her own humour . she feel so full of life and hope that she could hardly believe that she be the same girl who that very morning have hurl away the poison bottle , know in her heart that unless she destroy it she might be tempt to follow her guardian 's sinister suggestion . yet the incident be real enough , for there be the fragment of glass scatter over the bare plank of her floor , and the insidious odour of the drug be still so strong that she open the window in order to dissipate it . look back at it now , it all seem like some hideous nightmare . she have no very clear idea as to what she expect her friend to do . that she would be save , and that speedily , she never for one instant doubt . she have only to wait patiently and all would be well . by night , at the late , her trouble would be over . so think too , as he sit down below , with his head bent upon his breast and his eye look moodily from under his shaggy brow at the glowing coal . evening would settle the matter once and for ever . and would be down by five o'clock , and that would be the beginning of the end . as to 's future there be no difficulty about that . he be a break man . if well supply with unlimited liquor he would not live long to trouble them . he have nothing to gain , and everything to lose by denounce them . should the bad come to the bad , the ravings of a dipsomaniac could do little harm to a man as respect as the african merchant . every event have be foresee and provide for by the old schemer . above all , he have devise a method by which even a coroner 's inquiry could be face with impunity , and which would do away with all necessity for elaborate concealment . he beckon over to him , for he have be sit in the large room , which be use both as a dining-room and as a kitchen . " what be the late train ? " he ask . " there be one that reach at a quarter to ten . " " it pass the ground at about twenty to ten , then ? " " that that i could set my clock by it . " " that will do . where be ? " " upstairs , sir . she come back ' and ' and as sassy as you please to them as be old before she be bear . " " laughing ! " say , raise his eyebrow . " she do not seem in a laughing mood this morning . you do n't think she have go out of her mind , do you ? " " i do n't know nought about that . there be come down here ' ' cause she have order her out of her room . oh , she be mistress of the be no doubt about that . she will be ' of us all the sack presently . " relapse into silence , but his face show that he be puzzle by what he have hear . sleep a sound and dreamless sleep that night . at her age trouble be shake from the young mind like water from the feather of a duck . it have be all very gloomy and terrible while it last , but now the dawn of good day have come . she wake cheerful and light-hearted . she feel that when once she be free she could forgive her guardian and and all of . she would bury the whole hideous incident , and never think of it or refer to it again . she amuse herself that morning by reckon up in her mind what the sequence of event would be in , and how long it would be before she hear from her friend . if have telegraph , news would have reach them last night . probably she would write as well , give all the particular about her . the post come in about nine o'clock , she think . then some time would elapse before the major could find . after that , no doubt they would have to consider what have well be do , and perhaps would go and consult with . that would occupy the morning and part of the afternoon . they could hardly reach the priory before nightfall . would be down by that time . on the before he have arrive between five and six . a great dread fill her soul at the thought of meet the young merchant again . it be merely the natural instinct of a lady shrink from whatever be rough and coarse and antagonistic . she have no conception of the impending danger , or of what his come might mean to her . be more gracious to her than usual that morning at breakfast . he seem anxious to efface the remembrance of his fierce and threatening word the day before . , who wait upon them , be astonish to hear the way in which he speak . his whole manner be less heavy and ungainly than usual , for now that the time for action be at hand he feel brace and invigorate , as energetic man do . " you should study botany while you be down here , " he say blandly . " depend upon it , one can learn too many thing in one 's youth . besides , a knowledge of natural science teach us the marvellous harmony which prevail throughout the universe , and so enlarge our mind . " " i should very much like to know something of it , " answer . " my only fear be that i should not be clever enough to learn it . " " the wood here be full of wonder . the tiny mushroom be as extraordinary and as worthy of study as the large oak . your father be fond of plant and animal . " " yes , i can remember that , " say , her face grow sad as her mind travel back to year go by . what would that same father have think , she wonder , have he know how this man opposite to her have treat her ! what do it matter now , though , when she would so soon be out of his power ! " i remember , " say , stir his tea thoughtfully , " when we live in the city as ' prentice lad together , we share a room above the shop . he use to have a dormouse that he be very fond of . all his leisure time be spend in nurse the creature and clean its cage . it seem to be his only pleasure in life . one night it be run across the floor , and i put my foot upon it . " " oh , poor papa ! " cry . " i do it upon principle . ' you have devote too much time to the creature , ' i say . ' up your thought higher ! ' he be grieve and angry , but in time he come to thank me . it be a useful lesson . " be so startle by this anecdote that she remain silent for some little time . " how old be you then ? " she ask at last . " i be about sixteen . " " then you be that way ? " she find some difficulty in convey her meaning in polite tone . " yes ; i receive a call when i be very young . i become one of the elect at an early age . " " and which be the elect ? " his ward ask demurely . " the member of the of the , at least those of them who frequent . i hold that the minister in the other chapel that i have attend do not preach the , and have therefore miss the narrow path . " " then , " say , " you think that no one will be save except those who frequent the ? " " and not all of , nor one in ten , " the merchant say confidently , and with some approach to satisfaction . " heaven must be a very small place , " remark , as she rise from the table . " be you go out ? " " i be think of have a stroll in the wood . " " think over a text as you walk . it be an excellent commencement of the day . " " what text should i think of ? " she ask , stand smile in the doorway , with the bright sunshine burst in behind her . " ' in the midst of life we be in death , ' " he say solemnly . his voice be so hollow and stern that it strike a chill into the girl 's heart . the effect be only momentary , however . the day be so fine , and the breeze so fresh , that sadness be out of the question . besides , be not her deliverance at hand ! on this of all morning she should be free from vague presentiment and dim foreboding . the change in her guardian 's manner be an additional cause for cheerfulness . she almost persuade herself that she have misconstrue his word and his intention upon the preceding day . she go down the avenue and have a few word with the sentry there . she feel no bitterness against him the contrary , she could afford to laugh at his peculiarity . he be in a very bad humour on account of some domestic difficulty . his wife have be abuse him , and have end by assault him . " she use to first , and then fetch the poker , " he say ruefully ; " but now it be the poker first , and there ai n't no at all . " look at his savage face and burly figure , and think what a very courageous woman his wife must be . " it be all ' cause the fisher lass wo n't alone , " he explain with a leer . " she do n't like it , knock me sideways if she do ! it ai n't my fault , though . i have a kind o ' a ' way ' woman . " " do you post my note ? " ask . " yes , in course i do , " he answer . " it will be in now , most like . " his one eye move about in such a very shifty way as he speak that she be convince that he be tell a lie . she could not be sufficiently thankful that she have something else to rely upon besides the old scoundrel 's assurance . there be nothing to be see down the lane except a single cart with a loutish young man walk at the horse 's head . she have a horror of the country folk since her encounter with the two bumpkin upon the . she therefore slip away from the gate , and go through the wood to the shed , which she mount . on the other side of the wall there be stand a little boy in button , so rigid and motionless that he might have be one of madame 's figure , be it not for his eye , which be roll about in every direction , and which finally fix themselves on 's face . " good morning , miss , " say this apparition . " good morning , " she answer . " i think i see you with yesterday ? " " yes , miss . missus , she tell me to wait here and never to move until i seed you . she say as you would be sure to come . i have be ' here for nigh on an hour . " " your mistress be an angel , " say enthusiastically , " and you be a very good little boy . " " indeed , you have hit it about the missus , " say the youth , in a hoarse whisper , nod his head to emphasize his remark . " she be get a heart as be big enough for three . " could not help smile at the enthusiasm with which the little fellow speak . " you seem fond of her , " she say . " i will be a bad ' if i be n't . she take me out of the without character or nothing , and now she be ' of me . she send me ' ere with a message ? " " what be it ? " " she say as how she have write instead o ' , ' cause she have so much to say she could n't fit it all on a telegraph . " " i think that would be so , " say . " she write to as be ' of her . she say as she have no doubt as he will be down , and you be to keep up your and let her know by me if any one be ' you . " " no , no . not at all , " answer , smile again . " you can tell her that my guardian have be much kind . i be full of hope now . give her my warm thank for her kindness . " " all right , miss . say , that chap at the gate have n't be give you no cheek have with the game eye ? " " no , no , . " look at her suspiciously . " if he have n't , it be all right , " he say ; " but i think as you be one of them as do n't complain if you can ' it . " he open his hand and show a great jagged flint which he carry . " i have ' knock his other peeper out with this , " he say , " blow if i would n't ! " " do n't do anything of the sort , , but run home like a good little boy . " " all right , miss . good-bye to ! " watch him stroll down the lane . he pause at the bottom as if irresolute , and then she be relieve to see him throw the stone over into a turnip field , and walk rapidly off in the opposite direction to the gate . late in the afternoon arrive at the priory . from one of the passage window see him drive up the avenue in a high dog-cart . there be a broad-shouldered , red-bearded man sit beside him , and the ostler from the be perch behind . have rush to the window on hear the sound of wheel , with some dim expectation that her friend have come sooner than she anticipate . a glance , however , show her that the hope be vain . from behind a curtain she watch them alight and come into the house , while the trap wheel round and rattle off for again . she go slowly back to her room , wonder what friend this could be whom have bring with him . she have notice that he be roughly clad , present a contrast to the young merchant , who be vulgarly spruce in his attire . evidently he intend to pass the night at the priory , since they have let the trap go back to the village . she be glad that he have come , for his presence would act as a restraint upon the . in spite of her guardian 's amiability at breakfast , she could not forget the word which he have use the morning before or the incident of the poison bottle . she be as convince as ever that he mean mischief to her , but she have cease to fear him . it never for one moment occur to her that her guardian 's machination might come to a head before her rescuer could arrive . as the long afternoon steal away she become more and more impatient and expectant . she have be sew in her room , but she find that she could no longer keep her attention on the stitch . she pace nervously up and down the little apartment . in the room beneath she could hear the dull muffle sound of man 's voice in a long continuous monotone , break only by the interposition now and again of one voice which be so deep and loud that it remind her of the growl of a beast of prey . this must belong to the red-bearded stranger . wonder what it could be that they be talk over so earnestly . city affair , no doubt , or other business matter of importance . she remember have once hear it remark that many of the rich man on ' be eccentric and slovenly in their dress , so the new-comer might be a more important person than he seem . she have determine to remain in her room all the afternoon to avoid , but her restlessness be so great that she feel feverish and hot . the fresh air , she think , would have a revive effect upon her . she slip down the staircase , tread as lightly as possible not to disturb the gentleman in the refectory . they appear to hear her however , for the hum of conversation die away , and there be a dead silence until after she have pass . she go out on to the little lawn which lie in front of the old house . there be some scatter about on it , but they be overgrow with weed and in the last stage of neglect . she amuse herself by attempt to improve the condition of one of them and kneel down beside it she pull up a number of the weed which cover it . there be a wither in the centre , so she pull up that also , and succeed in impart some degree of order among the few plant which remain . she work with unnatural energy , pause every now and again to glance down the dark avenue , or to listen intently to any chance sound which might catch her ear . in the course of her work she chance to look up at the priory . the refectory face the lawn , and at the window of it there stand the three man look out at her . the be nod their head , as though they be point her out to the third man , who stand between them . he be look at her with an expression of interest . think as she return his gaze that she have never see a more savage and brutal face . he be flush and laughing , while beside him appear to be pale and anxious . they all , when they see that she notice them , step precipitately back from the window . she have only a momentary glance at them , and yet the three strange fierce red one , and the two hard familiar pale one which flank vividly impress upon her memory . have be so please at the early appearance of his ally , and the prospect of settle the matter once for all , that he receive them with a cordiality which be foreign to his nature . " always punctual , my dear son , and always to be rely upon , " he say . " you be a model to our young business man . as to you , , " he continue , grasp the navvy 's horny hand , " i be delight to see you at the priory , much as i regret the sad necessity which have bring you down . " " talk it over afterwards , " say shortly . " and i have have no luncheon yet . " " i be curse near starve , " the other growl , throw himself into a chair . have be careful to keep him from drink on the way down , and he be now sober , or as nearly sober as a brain saturate with liquor could ever be . call for , who lay the cloth and put a piece of cold corned beef and a jug of beer upon the table . appear to have a poor appetite , but eat voraciously , and fill his glass again and again from the jug . when the meal be finish and the ale all consume , he rise with a grunt of repletion , and , pull a roll of black tobacco from his pocket , proceed to cut it into slice , and to cram it into his pipe . draw a chair up to the fire , and his father do the same , after order the old woman out of the room and carefully close the door behind her . " you have speak to our friend here about the business ? " ask , nod his head in the direction of . " yes . i have make it all clear . " " five hundred pound down , and a free passage to , " say . " an energetic man like you can do a great deal in the colony with five hundred pound , " remark . " what i do with it be ' to you , guv'nor , " remark surlily . " i do the job , you pay the money , and there be an end as far as you be concern . " " quite so , " the merchant say in a conciliatory voice . " you be free to do what you like with the money . " " without ' your leave , " growl . he be a man of such a turbulent and quarrelsome disposition that he be always ready to go out of his way to make himself disagreeable . " the question be how it be to be do , " interpose . he be look very nervous and uneasy . hard as he be , he have neither the monomania of his father , nor the callous brutality of , and he shudder at the thought of what be to come . his eye be red and blear , and he sit with one arm throw over the back of his chair , while he drum nervously with the finger of his other hand upon his knee . " you have get some plan in your head , i suppose , " he say to his father . " it be high time the thing be carry through , or we shall have to put up the shutter in . " his father shiver at the very think . " anything rather than that , " he say . " it will precious soon come to that . it be the devil of a fight to keep thing straight last week . " " what be the matter with your lip ? it seem to be swell . " " i have a turn with that fellow , " answer , put his hand up to his mouth to hide the disfigurement . " he follow us to the station , and we have to beat him off ; but i think i leave my mark upon him . " " he play some damned hokey-pokey business on me , " say . " he trip me in some new-fangled way , and nigh knock the breath out of me . i do n't fall as light as i use . " " he do not succeed in trace you ? " ask uneasily . " there be no chance of his turn up here and spoil the whole business ? " " not the least , " say confidently . " he be in the hand of a policeman when i see him last . " " that be well . now i should like , before we go further , to say a few word to as to what have lead up to this . " " you have n't get a drop to drink , boss ? " " yes , yes , of course . what be that in the bottle over there ? ginger wine . how will that do ? " " here be something good , " say , rummage in the cupboard . " here be a bottle of . it be ' private store , i fancy . " pour himself out half a , and fill it up with water . " drive along , " he say ; " i be ' . " rise and stand with his back to the fire , and his hand under his coat-tail . " i wish you to understand , " he say , " that this be no sudden determination of ours , but that event have lead up to it in such a way that it be impossible to avoid it . our commercial honour and integrity be more precious to us than anything else , and we have both agree that we be ready to sacrifice anything rather than lose it . unfortunately , our affair have become somewhat involve , and it be absolutely necessary that the firm should have a sum of money promptly in order to extricate itself from its difficulty . this sum we endeavour to get through a daring speculation in diamond , which be , though i say it , ingeniously plan and cleverly carry out , and which would have succeed admirably have it not be for an unfortunate chance . " " i remember , " say . " of course . you be there at the time . we be able to struggle along for some time after this on money which we borrow and on the profit of our african trade . the time come , however , when the borrow money be to be repay , and once again the firm be in danger . it be then that we first think of the fortune of my ward . it be enough to turn the scale in our favour , could we lay our hand upon it . it be securely tie up , however , in such a way that there be only two mean by which we could touch a penny of it . one be by marry her to my son ; the other be by the young lady 's death . do you follow me ? " nod his shaggy head . " this being so , we do all that we could to arrange a marriage . without flattery i may say that no girl be ever approach in a more delicate and honourable way than she be by my son . i , for my part , bring all my influence to bear upon her in order to induce her to meet his advance in a proper spirit . in spite of our effort , she reject him in the most decide way , and give us to understand that it be hopeless to attempt to make her change her mind . " " some one else , maybe , " suggest . " the man who put you on your back at the station , " say . " ! i will pay him for that , " the navvy growl viciously . " a human life , , " continue , " be a sacred thing , but a human life , when weigh against the existence of a great firm from which hundred derive their mean of livelihood , be a small consideration indeed . when the fate of be put against the fate of the great commercial house of , it be evident which must go to the wall . " nod , and pour some more from the square bottle . " have see , " continue , " that this sad necessity might arise , i have make every arrangement some time before . this building be , as you may have observe in your drive , situate in a lonely and secluded part of the country . it be wall round too in such a manner that any one reside here be practically a prisoner . i remove the lady so suddenly that no one can possibly know where she have go to , and i have spread such report as to her condition that no one down here would be surprise to hear of her decease . " " but there be bound to be an inquiry . how about a medical certificate ? " ask . " i shall insist upon a coroner 's inquest , " his father answer . " an inquest ! be you mad ? " " when you have hear me i think that you will come to just the opposite conclusion . i think that i have hit upon a scheme which be really in its simplicity . " he rub his hand together , and show his long yellow fang in his enjoyment of his own astuteness . and lean forward to listen , while the old man sink his voice to a whisper . " they think that she be insane , " he say . " yes . " " there be a small door in the boundary wall which lead out to the railway line . " " well , what of that ? " " suppose that door to be leave open , would it be an impossible thing for a crazy woman to slip out through it , and to be run over by the ten o'clock express ? " " if she would only get in the way of it . " " you do n't quite catch my idea yet . suppose that the express run over the dead body of a woman , would there be anything to prove afterwards that she be dead , and not alive at the time of the accident ? do you think that it would ever occur to any one 's mind that the express run over a dead body ? " " i see your meaning , " say his son thoughtfully . " you would settle her , and then put her there . " " of course . what could be more delightfully simple . here do his work ; we carry her through the garden gate , and lay her on the dark part of the rail . then we miss her at the house . there be an alarm and a search . the gate be find open . we naturally go through with lantern , and find her on the line . i do n't think we need fear the coroner , or any one else then ? " " he be a sharp ' , be the guv'nor , " cry , slap his thigh enthusiastically . " it be the downy lay i have hear this many a day . " " i believe you be the devil incarnate , " say , look at his father with a mixture of horror and of admiration . " but how about and and ? would you trust them ? " " certainly not ! " answer . " it be not necessary . can do his part of the business out of door . we can entice her out upon some excuse . there be no reason why any one should have a suspicion of the truth . " " but they know that she be not mad . " " they will think that she do it on purpose . the secret will be lock up in our three breast . after one night be work our friend here go to the colony a prosperous man , and the firm of hold up its head once more , stainless and irreproachable . " " speak low ! " say , in a whisper . " i hear her come downstairs . " they listen to her light springy footstep as it pass the door . " come here , , " he say , after a pause . " she be at work on the lawn . come and have a look at her . " they all go over to the window , and look out . it be then that , glance up , see the three cruel face survey her . " she be a rare ' , " say , as he step back from the window . " it be the ugly job as ever i be on . " " but we can rely upon you ? " ask , look at him with pucker eye . " you long as you pay me , " the navvy answer phlegmatically , and go back to his pipe and to ' bottle of . the grey winter evening be begin to steal in before the detail have all be arrange by the conspirator . it have grow so chill that have abandon her attempt at gardening , and have go back to her room . leave his father and by the fire and come out to the open . the grim old tree look gaunt and eerie as they wave their naked arm about in the cut wind . a slight fog have come up from the sea and lay in light wreath over the upper branch , like a thin veil of gauze . be shiver as he survey the dreary scene , when he feel a hand on his arm , and look round see that the maid be stand beside him . " have n't you get one word for me ? " she say sadly , look up into his face . " it be but once a week , and then never a word of greeting . " " i do n't see you , my lass , " answer . " how do the suit you ? " " one place be the same as another to me , " she say drearily . " you ask me to come here , and i have come . you say once that you would let me know how i could serve you down here . when be i to know ? " " why , there be no secret about that . you do serve me when you look after my father as you have do these week back . that old woman be n't fit to manage the whole place by herself . " " that be n't what you mean , though , " say the girl , look at him with question eye . " i remember your face now as you speak the word . you have something on your mind , and have now , only you keep it to yourself . why wo n't you trust me with it ? " " do n't be a fool ! " answer curtly . " i have a great deal to worry me in business matter . much good it would do tell you about them ! " " it be more than that , " say doggedly . " who be that man who have come down ? " " a business man from . he have come to consult my father about money matter . any more question you would like to ask ? " " i should like to know how long we be to be keep down here , and what the meaning of it all may be . " " we be go back before the end of the winter , and the meaning of it be that be not well and need a change of air . now be you satisfy ? " he be determine to allay as far as possible any suspicion that the girl might have previously form . " and what bring you down here ? " she ask , with the same search look . " you do n't come down into this hole without some good reason . i do think at first that you might come down in order to see me , but you soon show me that it be n't that . there be a time when you be fond of me . " " so i be now , lass . " " ay , very fond ! not a word nor a look from you last time you come . you must have some reason , though , that bring you here . " " there be nothing wonderful in a man come to see his own father , " " much you care for him in , " she cry , with a shrill laugh . " if he be under the sod you would not be the sad . it be my belief as you come down after that missy upstairs . " " dry up , now ! " say roughly . " i have have enough of your confounded nonsense . " " you do n't talk in that style to her , " she say excitedly . " you scorn me , but i know this , that if i ca n't have your love no one else shall . i have get a dash of the gipsy in me , as you know . rather than that girl should have you , i would knife her and you , too ! " she shake her clench right hand as she speak , and her face be so full of vindictive passion that be astonish . " i always know that you be a spitfire , " he say , " but you never come it quite so strong as this before . " the reaction have already come upon her , however , and tear be run down her cheek . " you will never leave me entirely ? " she cry , clasp his arm . " i could bear to share your love with another , but i would n't have you turn altogether against me . " " you will have my father out presently with your damned noise ! " say . " get away , and wash your face . " his word be law to her , and she turn away , still weep bitterly . in her poor , dim , life the sole bright spot have be the attention which the young merchant have occasionally show her . to her distorted fancy he be a man among man , a hero , all that be admirable and magnificent . what be there which she would not do for him ? she have the faithfulness of a dog , but like a dog she would snarl fiercely at any one who come between her master 's affection and herself . deep down in her heart rankle the one suspicion which no assurance could remove , that an understanding exist between the man she love and the woman she hate . as she withdraw to her room she determine that during this visit of 's she would manage in such a way that no communication could pass between them without her knowledge . she know that it be a dangerous thing to play the spy upon the young man , for he have show her before now that her sex be no precaution against his brutality . nevertheless , she set herself to do it , with all the cunning and perseverance of a jealous woman . as the light fade and the grey of evening deepen into darkness , sit patiently in her bare little room . a coal fire sputter and sparkle in the rusty grate , and there be a tin bucket full of coal beside the fender from which to replenish it . she be very cold , so she draw her single chair up to the blaze and hold her hand over it . it be a lonesome and melancholy vigil , while the wind whistle through the branch of the tree and moan drearily in the crack and cranny of the old house . when be her friend come ? perhaps something have occur to detain them . this morning such a thing would have appear to her to be an impossibility , but now that the time have come when she have expect them , it appear probable enough that something might have delay them . at late they could not fail to come . she wonder what they would do if they do arrive . would they come boldly up the avenue and claim her from the , or would they endeavour to communicate with her first ? whatever they decide upon would be sure to be for the good . she go to the window once and look out . it promise to be a wild night . far away in the lie a great cumulus of rugged cloud from which dark streamer radiate over the sky , like the advance guard of an army . here and there a pale star twinkle dimly out through the rift , but the great part of the heaven be black and threatening . it be so dark that she could no longer see the sea , but the crash , booming sound of the great wave fill the air and the salt spray come drive in through the open window . she shut it and resume her seat by the fire , shiver partly from cold and partly from some vague presentiment of evil . an hour or more have pass when she hear a step upon the stair and a knock come to her door . it be , with a cup of tea upon a tray and some bread-and-butter . be grateful at this attention , for it save her from have to go down to the dining-room and face and his companion . lay down the tray , and then , to her mistress 's surprise , turn back and shut the door . the girl 's face be very pale , and her manner be wild and excited . " here be a note for you , " she say . " it be give to give you , but i be well at climb stair than she be , so i bring it up . " she hand a little slip of paper as she speak . a note for her ! could it be that her friend have arrive and have manage to send a message to her ? it must be so . she take it from the maid . as she do so she notice that the other 's hand be shake as though she have the ague . " you be not well , , " say kindly . " oh yes , i be . you read your note and do n't mind me , " the girl answer , in her usual surly fashion . instead of leave the room , she be bustle about the bed as though put thing in order . 's impatience be too great to allow her to wait , so she the paper , which have no seal or fastening . she have hope in her heart to see the name of her lover at the end of it . instead of that , her eye fall upon the signature of . what could he have to say to her ? she move the solitary candle on to the mantelpiece , and read the follow note , roughly scribble upon a coarse piece of paper : -- - " . " " i be afraid your confinement here have be very irksome to you . i have repeatedly request my father to alleviate or modify it , but he have invariably refuse . as he still persist in his refusal , i wish to offer you my aid , and , to show you that i be your sincere friend in spite of all that have pass , it you could slip out at nine o'clock and meet me by the wither oak at the head of the avenue , i shall see you safe to , and you can , if you wish , go on to by the next train . i shall manage so that you may find the door open by that time . i shall not , of course , go to with you , but shall return here after drop you at the station . i do this small thing to show you that , hopeless as it may be , the affection which i bear you be still as deep as ever . " " yours , " " . " our heroine be so surprise at this epistle that she sit for some time dangle the slip of paper between her finger and lose in thought . when she glance round , have leave the room . she roll the paper up and throw it into the fire . , then , be not so hard-hearted as she have think him . he have use his influence to soften his father . should she accept this chance of escape , or should she wait some word from her friend ? perhaps they be already in , but do not know how to communicate with her . if so , this offer of 's be just what be need . in any case , she could go on to and telegraph from there to the . it be too good an offer to be refuse . she make up her mind that she would accept it . it be past eight now , and nine be the hour . she stand up with the intention of put on her cloak and her bonnet . this conversation with have suggest to that he might still have influence enough with his father 's ward to induce her to come out of door , and so put herself within the reach of . he have propose the plan to his father , who approve of it heartily . the only weak point in his scheme have be the difficulty which might arise in induce the girl to venture out of the priory on that tempestuous winter 's night . there be evidently only one incentive strong enough to bring it about , and that be the hope of escape . by harp skilfully upon this string they might lure her into the trap . and his father compose the letter together , and the former hand it to , with a request that she should deliver it . it chance , however , that , keenly alive to any attempt at communication between the young merchant and her mistress , see the crone hobble down the passage with the note in her hand . " what be that , mother ? " she ask . " it be a letter for her , " wheeze the old woman , nod her tremulous head in the direction of 's room . " i will take it up , " say eagerly . " i be just go up there with her tea . " " thank . them stair try my something cruel . " the maid take the note and carry it upstairs . instead of take it straight to her mistress she slip into her own room and read every word of it . it appear to confirm her bad suspicion . here be ask an interview with the woman whom he have assure her that he hate . it be true that the request be make in measured word and on a plausible pretext . no doubt that be merely to deceive any other eye which might rest upon it . there be an understanding between them , and this be an assignation . the girl walk swiftly up and down the room like a cage tigress , strike her head with her clench hand in her anger and bite her lip until the blood come . it be some time before she could overcome her agitation sufficiently to deliver the note , and when she do so her mistress , as we have see , notice that her manner be nervous and wild . she little dream of the struggle which be go on in the dark-eyed girl 's mind against the impulse which urge her to seize her imagine rival by the white throat and choke the life out of her . " it be eight o'clock now , " be say downstairs . " i wonder whether she will come ? " " she be sure to come , " his father say briefly . " suppose she do n't ? " " in that case we should find other mean to bring her out . we have not go so far , to break down over a trifle at the last moment . " " i must have something to drink , " say , after a pause , help himself from the bottle . " i feel as cold as ice and as nervous as a cat . i ca n't understand how you look so unconcerned . if you be go to sign an invoice or audit an account or anything else in the way of business you could not take it more calmly . i wish the time would come . this waiting be terrible . " " let us pass the time to advantage , " say ; and draw a little fat bible from his pocket he begin to read it aloud in a solemn and sonorous voice . the yellow light illuminate the old merchant 's massive feature as he stoop forwards towards the candle . his strongly mark nose and his hollow cheek give him a vulture-like aspect , which be increase by the effect of his deep-set glitter eye . , lean back in his chair with the firelight flicker over his haggard but still handsome face , look across at his father with a puzzle expression . he have never yet be able to determine whether the old man be a consummate hypocrite or a religious monomaniac . lie with his foot in the light of the fire and his head sink back across the arm of the chair , fast asleep and snore loudly . " be n't it time to wake him up ? " ask , interrupt the reading . " yes , i think it be , " his father answer , close the sacred volume reverently and replace it in his bosom . take up the candle and hold it over the sleeping man . " what a brute he look ! " he say . " do ever you see such an animal in your life ? " the navvy be certainly not a pretty sight . his muscular arm and leg be all and his head hang back at a strange angle to his body , so that his fiery red beard point upwards , expose all the thick sinewy throat beneath it . his eye be half open and look blear and unhealthy , while his thick lip puff out with a whistle sound at every expiration . his dirty brown coat be throw open , and out of one of the pocket protrude a short thick cudgel with a leaden head . pick it out and try it in the air . " i think i could kill an ox with this , " he say . " do n't wave it about head , " cry . " as you stand in the firelight brandish that stick in your long arm you be less attractive than usual . " smile and replace the cudgel in the sleeper 's pocket . " wake up , , " he cry , shake him by the arm . " it be eight . " the navvy start to his foot with an oath and then fall back into his chair , stare round him vacantly , at a loss as to where he might be . his eye fall upon the bottle of , which be now nearly empty , and he hold out his hand to it with an exclamation of recognition . " i have be asleep , guv'nor , " he say hoarsely . " must have a dram to set me straight . do you say it be time for the job . " " we have make arrangement by which she will be out by the wither oak at nine o'clock . " " that be not for half an hour , " cry , in a surly voice . " you need not have wake me yet . " " we will well go out there now . she may come rather before the time " " come on , then ! " say the navvy , button up his coat and roll a ragged cravat round his throat . " who be ' with me ? " " we shall both come , " answer firmly . " you will need help to carry her to the railway line . " " surely can do that himself , " remark . " she be not so very heavy . " draw his son aside . " do n't be so foolish , , " he say . " we ca n't trust the fellow . it must be do with the great carefulness and precision , and no trace leave . our old business watchword be to overlook everything ourselves , and we shall certainly do so now . " " it be a horrible affair ! " say , with a shudder . " i wish i be out of it . " " you wo n't think that morning when you realize that the firm be save and no one the wise . he have go on . do n't lose sight of him . " they both hurry out , and find standing in front of the door . it be blow half a gale now , and the wind be bitterly cold . there come a melancholy rasp and rustle from the leafless wood , and every now and again a sharp crackling sound would announce that some rotten branch have come crash down . the cloud drive across the face of the moon , so that at time the cold , clear light silver the dark wood and the old monastery , while at other all be plunge in darkness . from the open door a broad golden bar be shoot across the lawn from the lamp in the hall . the three dark figure with their long fantastic shadow look eerie and unnatural in the yellow glare . " be we to have a lantern ? " ask . " no , no , " cry . " we shall see quite enough as it be . we do n't want a light . " " i have one , " say the father . " we can use it if it be necessary . i think we have well take our place now . she may come sooner than we expect . it will be well to leave the door as it be . she will see that there be no obstacle in the way . " " you be not half sharp enough , " say . " if the door be leave like that it might suggest a trap to her . well close the dining-room door and then leave the hall door just a little ajar . that would look more natural . she would conclude that and you be in there . " " where be and ? " ask , close the door as suggest . " be in her room . , i have no doubt , be in hers also . " " thing look safe enough . come along , . this way . " the three tramp their way across the gravel drive and over the slushy grass to the border of the wood . " this be the wither oak , " say , as a dark mass loom in front of them . it stand somewhat apart from the other tree , and the base of it be free from the bramble which form a thick undergrowth elsewhere . walk round the great trunk and make as careful an examination of the ground as he could in the dark . " would the lantern be of any use to you ? " ask . " no , it be all serene . i think i know how to fix it now . you two can get behind those tree , or where you like , as long as you be not in the way . i do n't want no ' . when take a job in hand he carry it through in a workmanlike manner . i do n't want nobody else ' around . " " we would not dream of interfere with your arrangement , " say . " you will well not ! " growl . " i will lay down behind this oak , see . when she come , she will think as he be not arrive yet , and she will get standin ' around and ' . when i see my chance , i will get behind her , and she will never know that she have not be strike by ' . " " excellent ! " cry ; " excellent ! we have well get into our place . " " mind you do it all in one crack , " say . " do n't let us have any cry out afterwards . i could stand a good deal , but not that . " " you should know how i hit , " remark with a malicious grin , which be hide from his companion . " if your head be n't well nigh solid you would n't be here now . " 's hand involuntarily go up to the old scar . " i think such a one as that would settle her ! " he say , as he withdraw with his father . the two take up their position under the shadow of some tree fifty yard off or more . crouch down behind the wither oak with his weapon in his hand and wait for the come of his victim . , though usually resolute and daring , have completely lose his nerve , and his tooth be chatter in his head . his father , on the other hand , be emotionless and impassive as ever . " it be close upon nine o'clock , " whisper . " ten minute to , " say the other , peer at his great golden chronometer through the darkness . " what if she fail to come ? " " we must devise other mean of bring her out . " from the spot where they stand they have a view of the whole of the priory . she could not come out without be see . above the door be a long narrow window which open upon the staircase . on this and his son fix their eye , for they know that on her way down she would be visible at it . as they look , the dim light which shine through it be obscure and then reappear . " she have pass ! " " ! " another moment and the door be stealthily open . once again the broad golden bar shoot out across the lawn almost to the spot where the confederate be crouch . in the centre of the zone of light there stand a figure of the girl . even at that distance they could distinguish the pearl-grey mantle which she usually wear and the close-fitting bonnet . she have wrap a shawl round the low part of her face to protect her from the boisterous wind . for a minute or more she stand peer out into the darkness of the night , as though uncertain whether to proceed or to go back . then , with a quick , sudden gesture she close the door behind her . the light be no longer there , but they know that she be outside the house , and that the appointment would be keep . what an age it seem before they hear her footstep . she come very slowly , put one foot gingerly before the other , as if afraid of fall over something in the darkness . once or twice she stop altogether , look round , no doubt , to make sure of her whereabouts . at that instant the moon shine out from behind a cloud , and they see her dark figure a short distance on . the light enable her to see the wither oak , for she come rapidly towards it . as she approach , she satisfy herself apparently that she be the first on the ground , for she slacken her pace once more and walk in the listless way that people assume when they be wait . the cloud be overtake the moon again , and the light be get dimmer . " i can see her still , " say in a whisper , grasp his father 's wrist in his excitement . the old man say nothing , but he peer through the darkness with eager , strain eye . " there she be , stand out a little from the oak , " the young merchant say , point with a quiver finger . " she be not near enough for him to reach her . " " he be come out from the shadow now , " the other say huskily . " do n't you see him crawl along the ground ? " " i see him , " return the other in the same subdued , awestruck voice . " now he have stop ; now he go on again ! , he be close behind her ! she be look the other way . " a thin ray of light shot down between the cloud . in its silvery radiance two figure stand out hard and black , that of the unconscious girl and of the man who crouch like a beast of prey behind her . he make a step forward , which bring him within a yard of her . she may have hear the heavy footfall above the shriek of the storm , for she turn suddenly and face him . at the same instance she be strike down with a crash blow . there be no time for a prayer , no time for a scream . one moment have see her a magnificent woman in all the pride of her youthful beauty , the next leave her a poor battered , senseless wreck . the navvy have earn his blood-money . at the sound of the blow and the sight of the fall both the old man and the young run out from their place of concealment . be stand over the body , his bludgeon in his hand . " not even a groan ! " he say . " what think of that ? " wring his hand and congratulate him warmly . " shall i light the lantern ? " he ask . " for 's sake , do n't ! " say earnestly . " i have no idea that you be so faint-hearted , my son , " the merchant remark . " however , i know the way to the gate well enough to go there blindfold . what a comfort it be to know that there be no blood about ! that be the advantage of a stick over a knife . " " you be correct there , guv'nor , " say approvingly . " will you kindly carry one end and i will take the other . i will go first , if you do n't mind , because i know the way well . the train will pass in less than half an hour , so we have not long to wait . within that time every chance of detection will have go . " raise up the head of the murder girl , and take her foot . walk behind as though he be in some dreadful dream . he have fully recognize the necessity for the murder , but he have never before realize how ghastly the detail would be . already he have begin to repent that he have ever acquiesce in it . then come thought of the splendid possibility of the african business , which could only be save from destruction by this woman 's death . how could he , with his luxurious taste , bear the squalor and poverty which would be his lot be the firm to fail ? well a rope and a long drop than such a life as that ! all these consideration throng into his mind as he plod along the slippery footpath which lead through the forest to the wooden gate . when and the major arrive at , the latter in the breathless condition describe in a preceding chapter , they find the german waiting for them with his two . the gentleman of nihilistic proclivity be somewhat tall and thin , with a long frock-coat button almost up to his throat , which show sign of give at the seam every here and there . his grizzly hair fall over his collar behind , and he have a short bristle beard . he stand with one hand stick into the front of his coat and the other upon his hip , as though rehearse the position in which his statue might be some day erect in the street of his native , when the people have their own , and despotism be no more . in spite of his worn attire there be something noble and striking about the man . his bow , when introduce him to the major and , would have grace any in . round his neck he have a coarse string from which hang a pair of double eye-glass . these he fix upon his aquiline nose , and take a good look at the gentleman whom he have come to serve . , of , be a small , dark-eyed , clean-shaven fellow , quick and energetic in his movement , have more the appearance of a celt than of a teuton . he seem to be full of amiability , and assure the major in execrable how very happy he be to be able to do a service to one who have show kindness to their esteem colleague and persecute patriot , . indeed both of the man show great deference to the german , and the major begin to perceive that his friend be a very exalt individual in socialistic circle . he like the look of the two foreigner , and congratulate himself upon have their co-operation in the matter on hand . ill luck be in store for the expedition , however . on inquiry at the they find that there be no train for upwards of two hour , and then it be a slow one which would not land them until eight o'clock at . at this piece of information fairly break down , and stamp about the station , rave and beseech the official to run a special , be the cost what it might . this , however , could by no mean be do , owe to the press of traffic . there be nothing for it but to wait . the three foreigner go off in search of something to eat , and have find a convenient they disappear therein and feast royally at 's expense . remain with the young man , who resolutely refuse to leave the platform . the major know of a snug little corner not far off where he could have put in the time very comfortably , but he could not bring himself to desert his companion even for a minute . i have no doubt that that wait of two hour in the draughty station be mark up somewhere to the old sinner 's credit account . indeed , it be well that day that young have good friend at his back . his appearance be so strange and wild that the passer-by turn back to have another look at him , his eye be open and stare , give a character to his expression . he could not sit still for an instant , but pace up and down and backwards and forwards under the influence of the fierce energy which consume him , while the major plod along manfully at his side , suggest every consideration which might cheer him up , and narrate many tale , true and apocryphal , most of which fall upon heedless ear . have four hour ' start of them . that be the thought which rankle in 's heart and outweigh every other consideration . he know 's nature so well that he be convince that she would never have express such fear to unless she have very assure reason for them . in fact , apart from her own word , what could this secrecy and seclusion mean except foul play . after what he have learn about the insurance of the ship and the manner in which the elder have induce him to cease corresponding with , he could believe anything of his partner . he know , also , that in case of 's death the money revert to her guardian . there be not a single link miss in the chain of evidence which show that a crime be in contemplation . then , who be that man whom be take down with him ? could have tear his hair as he think of his present impotence and of his folly in lose sight of young . the major have put it on record that those two hour appear to him the long that ever he pass in his life , and , no doubt , would endorse the sentiment . everything must have an end , however , and the station clock , the hand of which seem several time to have stop altogether , begin at last to approach the hour at which the train be time to depart . and his two friend have come back , all three smoking cigarette , and look the good for their visit to the . the five get into a first-class railway carriage and wait . would they never have do examine ticket and stamp luggage and go through all sort of tedious formality ? at last , thank ! come the shrill whistle of the guard , the answer snort from the engine , and they be fairly start upon their mission of rescue . there be much to be arrange as to their plan of action . , , and the major talk it over in a low voice , while the two chat together in german and consume eternal cigarette . be for march straight up to the priory and demand that should deliver his ward up to them . to the major and the german this seem an unwise proceeding . it be to put themselves hopelessly wrong from a legal point of view . have only to say , as he assuredly would , that the whole story be a ridiculous mare 's nest , and then what proof could they adduce , or what excuse give for their interference . however plausible their suspicion might be , they be , after all , only suspicion , which other people might not view in as grave a light . " what would you advise , then ? " ask , pass his hand over his heated forehead . " ! i will tell you the plan , " the old soldier answer , " and i think me friend will with me . i understand that this place be surround by a wall to which there be only one gate . sure , we shall wait outside this wall , and one of us can go in as a skirmisher and find out how the land lie . let him ascertain from the young lady herself if she require help , and what she would wish do . if he ca n't make his way to her , let him hang about the house , and see and hear all that he can . we shall then have something solid to work on . i have a dog whistle here on me watch-chain , give me by , of the . our skirmisher could take that with him , and if he want help one blow of it would be enough to bring the four of us over to him . though how the i be to git over a wall , " conclude the major ruefully , look down at his own proportion , " be more than i can tell . " " i hope , my , " say , " you allow me the honour of go first , for i vas in the swabian i vas always count a very good . " " that be my place , " say with decision . " you have the good claim , " the major answer . " what a train this be ! , it be as slow as the one which , of the commissariat , travel in in . they be along , accord to , when they see a cow walk along the in front of them . they all think that they be go to run into her , but it be all right , for they never overtake her , and she soon walk out of sight . here we be at a station ! how far to , guard ? " " next station , sir . " " thank the ! it be to eight . we be rather behind our time . you always be if you be in a particular hurry . " it be nearly eight o'clock by the time they reach their destination . the station-master direct them to the , where they secure the very vehicle in which and her guardian have be originally drive up . by the time that the horse be put in it be close upon the half-hour . " drive as hard as you can go to the , me man , " say the major . the sulky ostler make no remark , but a look of surprise pass over his phlegmatic countenance . for year back so little have be hear of the old monastery that its very existence have be almost forget in . now whole troop of londoner be come down in succession , demand to be drive there . he ponder over the strange fact as he drive through the darkness , but the only conclusion to which his bucolic mind could come be that it be high time to raise the fare to that particular point . it be a miserable night , stormy and wet and bitterly cold . none of the five man have a thought to spare for the weather , however . the two foreigner have be so infect by the suppress excitement of their companion , or have so identify themselves with their comrade ' cause , that they be as eager as the other . " be we near ? " the major ask . " the gate be just at the end o ' the lane , sir . " " do n't pull up at the gate , but take us a little past it . " " there ai n't no way in except the gate , " the driver remark . " do what you be order , " say the major sternly . once again the ostler 's face betray unbounded astonishment . he slewed half-way round in his seat and take as good a look as be possible in the uncertain light at the face of his passenger . it have occur to him that it be more than likely that he would have to swear to them at some future date in a . " i will know that thick ' ' the red face , " he mutter to himself , " and him ' the beard and the stick . " they pass the stone pillar with the weather-beaten heraldic device , and drive along by the high park wall . when they have go a hundred yard or so the major order the driver to pull up , and they all get down . the increase fare be pay without remonstrance , and the ostler rattle away homewards , with the intention of pull up at the county police-station and lodging information as to the suspicious visitor whom he have bring down . " it be that they have a watch at the gate , " say the major . " we must away from there . this wall be a great . we will well on until we find the place to scale it . " " i could get over it here , " say eagerly . " wait a bit . a few minute can make no difference one way or the other . use to say that there be more battle lose by than by slowness . what be the high bank run along on the right here ? " " be a railway , " say . " see post and little red light over yonder . " " so it be . the wall seem to me to be low here . what be this dark thing ? , here be a door lading into the ground . " " it be lock though . " " give me a hoist here , " say imploringly . " do n't throw a minute away . you ca n't tell what may be go on inside . at this very moment for all we know they may be plot her murder . " " he have right , " say . " we shall await here until we hear from you . help him , my him up ! " catch the coping of the wall , although the break glass cut deeply into his hand . with a great heave he swing himself up , and be soon astride upon the top . " here be the whistle , " say the major , stand on tiptoe to reach a hand . " if you want us , give a good blow at it . we will be with you in a brace of shake . if we ca n't get over the wall we will have the door down . a fear but we will be there ! " be in the act of let himself drop into the wood , when suddenly the watcher below see him crouch down upon the wall , and lie motionless , as though listen intently . " ! " he whisper , lean over . " some one be come through the wood . " the wind have die away and the storm subside . even from the lane they could hear the sound of foot , and of muffle voice inside the ground . they all crouch down in the shadow of the wall . lie flat upon the coping , and no one look from below could distinguish him from the wall itself . the voice and the footstep sound louder and louder , until they be just at the other side of the boundary . they seem to come from several people walk slowly and heavily . there be the shrill rasp of a key , and the wooden door swing back on its rusty hinge , while three dark figure pass out who appear to bear some burden between them . the party in the shadow crouch closer still , and peer through the darkness with eager , anxious eye . they could discern little save the vague outline of the move man , and yet as they gaze at them an unaccountable and overpowering horror creep into the heart of every one of them . they breathe the atmosphere of death . the new-comer tramp across the road , and , push through the thin hedge , ascend the railway embankment upon the other side . it be evident that their burden be a heavy one , for they stop more than once while ascend the steep grassy slope , and once , when near the top , one of the party slip , and there be a sound as though he have fall upon his knee , together with a stifle oath . they reach the top , however , and their figure , which have disappear from view , come into sight again , stand out dimly against the murky sky . they bend down over the railway line , and place the indistinguishable mass which they bear carefully upon it . " we must have the light , " say a voice . " no , no ; there be no need , " another expostulate . " we ca n't work in the dark , " say a third , loudly and harshly . " where be your lantern , guv'nor ? i have get a lucifer . " " we must manage that the train pass over right , " the first voice remark . " here , , you light it ? " there be the sharp sound of the striking of a match , and a feeble glimmer appear , in the darkness . it flicker and wane , as though the wind would extinguish it , but next instant the wick of the lantern have catch , and throw a strong yellow glare upon the scene . the light fall upon the major and his comrade , who have spring into the road , and it light up the group on the railway line . yet it be not upon the rescue party that the murderer fix their terror-stricken eye , and the major and his friend have lose all thought of the miscreant above there , stand in the centre of the roadway , there with the light flicker over her pale sweet face , like a spirit from the tomb , stand none other than the , girl for whom 's murderous blow have be intend . for a few moment she stand there without either party move a foot or utter a sound . then there come from the railway line a cry so wild that it will ring for ever in the ear of those who hear it . drop upon his knee and put his band over his eye to keep out the sight . catch his son by the wrist and dash away into the darkness , fly wildly , madly , with white face and stare eye , as man who have look upon that which be not of this world . in the meantime , have spring down from his perch , and have clasp in his arm , and there she lie , sob and laugh , with many pretty feminine ejaculation and exclamation and question , save at last from the net of death which have be close upon her so long . if ever two man be completely cow and break down those two be the african merchant and his son . wet , torn , and soil , they still struggle on in their aimless flight , crash through hedge and clamber over obstacle , with the one idea in their frenzied mind of leave mile between them and that fair accuse face . exhaust and pant they still battle through the darkness and the storm , until they see the gleam of the surge and hear the crash of the great wave upon the beach . then they stop amid the sand and the shingle . the moon be shine down now in all its calm splendour , illuminate the great toss ocean and the long dark sweep of the coast . by its light the two man look at one another , such a look as two lost soul might have exchange when they hear the gate of hell first clang behind them . who could have recognize them now as the respected trader of and his fastidious son . their clothes be tatter , their face splash with mud and scar by bramble and thorn , the elder man have lose his hat , and his silvery hair blow out in a confused tangle behind him . even more noticeable , however , than the change in their attire be the alteration in their expression . both have the same startle , furtive look of apprehension , like beast of prey who hear the bay of the hound in the distance . their quiver hand and gasp breath betray their exhaustion , yet they glance around them nervously , as though the least sound would send them off once more upon their wild career . " you devil ! " cry at last , in a harsh , choke voice , take a step towards his father with a gesture as though he would have strike him . " you have bring us to this with your cant and scheme and plot . what be we to do ? answer me that ! " he catch the old man by the coat and shake him violently . 's face be all draw , as though he be threaten with a fit , and his eye be glassy and vacant . the moonlight glitter in them and play over his contorted feature . " do you see her ? " he whisper with tremble lip . " do you see her ? " " yes , i see her , " the other answer brusquely ; " and i see that infernal fellow from , and the major , and know how many more behind her . a nice hornet ' nest to bring about one 's ear . " " it be her spirit , " say his father in the same awe-struck voice . " the spirit of 's murder daughter . " " it be the girl herself , " say . he have be panic-stricken at the moment , but have have time during their flight to realize the situation . " we have make a pretty botch of the whole thing . " " the girl herself ! " cry in bewilderment . " for 's sake , do n't mock me ! who be it that we carry through the wood and lay upon the rail ? " " who be it ? why that jealous jade , , of course , who must have read my note and come out in the other 's cloak and hat to hear what i have to say to her . the cursed fool ! " " the wrong woman ! " mutter with the same vacant look upon his face . " all for nothing , nothing ! " " do n't stand mumble to yourself there , " cry , catch his father 's arm and half drag him along the beach . " do n't you understand that there be a hue and cry out after you , and that we will be hang if we be take . wake up and exert yourself . the gallows would be a nice end to all your preaching and pray , would n't it ? " they hurry along together down the beach , plough their way through the loose shingle and trip over the great mat of seaweed which have be cast up in the recent gale . the wind be still so great that they have to lower their head and to put their shoulder against it , while the salt spray cause their eye to smart and tingle on their lip . " where be you take me , my son ? " ask the old man once . " to the only chance we have of safety . come on , and ask no question . " through the murkiness of the night they see a single light flicker dimly ahead of them . this be evidently the goal at which be aim . as they toil on it grow large and bright , until it resolve itself into the glare of a lamp shine through a small window . recognize the place now . it be the hut of a fisherman name , who live a mile or more from . he remember have his attention attract to the place by the curious nature of the building , which be construct out of the remnant of a norwegian barque strand some year before . the thatch which cover it and the window and door cut in the side give it a curiously hybrid appearance , and make it an object of interest to sightseer in those part . be the owner of a fair-sized , which he work with his eldest son , and which be say to yield him a decent livelihood . " what be you go to do ? " ask , as his son make his way to the door . " do n't look like a ghost , " answer in an angry whisper . " we be all safe , if we be only cool . " " i be well now . you can trust me . " " keep a smile face , then , " say , and knock loudly at the door of the hut . the occupant have not hear their approach owe to the storm , but the instant that the young merchant strike the door there be a buzz of conversation and the sharp bark of a dog . then come a dull thud and the bark cease , from which conclude that some one have hurl a boot at the animal . " we hai n't no bait , " cry a gruff voice . " can i see ? " ask . " i tell ' we hai n't no bait , " roar the voice in a more irritable tone . " we do n't want bait . we want a word of talk , " say . as he speak , the door fly open , and a burly middle-aged man , in a red shirt , appear , with a face which be almost the same colour as his garment . " we hai n't get -- " he be begin , when he suddenly recognize his visitor and break short off , stare at them with as much surprise as it be possible for human feature to express . " well , if it ai n't the from the priory ! " he exclaim at last , with a whistle , which seem to be his way of let off the astonishment which would otherwise remain bottle up in his system . " we want a minute 's talk with you , , " say . " surely , ! " the fisherman cry , bustle indoors and rub the top of two stool with his sleeve . " coom in ! ' , , pull the seat up for the . " at this summons , a lanky , big-boned hobbledehoy , in sea boot , push the stool up towards the fire , on which a log of wood be blaze cheerily . the two sit warm themselves , while the fisherman and his son survey them silently with open eye and mouth , as though they be a pair of strange zoological curiosity cast up by the gale . " keep , ! " the fisherman say hoarsely to a great collie dog who be lick at 's hand . " what be he a ' at ? why , sure , sir , there be blood on your hand . " " my father scratch himself , " say promptly . " his hat have blow away too , and we lose our way in the dark , so we be rather in a mess . " " why , so you be ! " cry , eye them up and down . " i think , when i hear you , as it be they folk from as come ' ere for bait whenever they be short . that be nigh about the only visitor we ever get here ; n't it , ? " , thus appeal to , make no articulate reply , but he open his great mouth and laugh vociferously . " we have come for something which will pay you good than that , " say . " you remember my meet you two or three saturday ago , and speak to you about your house and your boat and one thing or another ? " the fisherman nod . " you say something then about your boat be a good sea-going craft , and that it be as roomy as many a yacht . i think i tell you that i might give it a try some day . " the fisherman nod again . his wonder eye be still survey his visitor , dwell on every rent in their clothes or stain on their person . " my father and i want to get down the coast as far as the . now we think that we might just as well give your boat a turn and have your son and yourself to work it . i suppose she be fit to go that distance ? " " fit ! she be fit to go to ' ! the ai n't and twenty mile . with a good breeze she would do it in a day . by afternoon we will be ready to make a start if the wind slacken . " " afternoon ! we must be there by that time . we want you to start . " the seaman look round at his son , and the boy burst out laugh once again . " it ' be a rum start for a at this time o ' night , with half a gale from the sou'-west . i never hear tell o ' a thing ! " " look here , " say , bend forward and emphasize his word with his uplift hand , " we have set our mind on go , and we do n't mind pay for the fancy . the sooner we start the well pleased we shall be . name your price . if you wo n't take us , there be many in that will . " " well , it be a cruel bad night to be sure , " the fisherman answer . " like as not we will get the boat knock about , an ' maybe have her ' damage . we have be ' of her too , and that would be spoil . it be a powerful long way , and then there be the ' back . it mean the loss of two or three day ' work , and there be plenty of fish on the coast now , and a good market for them . " " would thirty pound pay you ? " ask . the sum be considerably more than the fisherman would have venture to ask . the very magnificence of it , however , encourage him to hope that more might be forthcoming . " would n't pay me for the loss and trouble , " he say ; " forbye the damage to the boat . " " say forty , then , " say . " it be rather much to pay for a freak of this sort , but we wo n't haggle over a pound or two . " the old seaman scratch his head as though uncertain whether to take this blessing which the god have send or to hold out for more . solve the matter by spring to his foot . " come on to , father , " he cry . " we will get what we want there . " " steady , sir , steady ! " the fisherman say hastily . " i do n't say as i be n't good for the job . i be ready to start for the sum you name . hurry up , , and get the tackle ready . " the youth begin to bustle about at this summons , bear thing out into the darkness and run back for more with an alacrity which one would hardly have suspect from his uncouth appearance . " can i wash my hand ? " ask . there be several crimson stain where he have hold the body of the murder girl . it appear that 's bludgeon be not such a bloodless weapon after all . " there be water , sir , in that bucket . maybe you would like a bit o ' plaster to bind up the cut ? " " it be not bad enough for that , " say the merchant hastily . " i will leave you here , " the fisherman remark . " there be much to be do down . you will have poor ' i be afraid ; biscuit and water and bully beef . " " never mind that . hurry up all you can . " the man tramp away down to the beach , and remain with his father in the hut . the old man wash his hand very carefully , and pour the stain water away outside the door . " how be you go to pay this man ? " he ask . " i have some money sew up in my waistcoat , " answer . " i be n't such a fool as not to know that a crash might come at any moment . i be determine that all should not go to the creditor . " " how much have you ? " " what be that to you ? " ask angrily . " you mind your own affair . the money 's mine , since i have save it . it be quite enough if i spend part of it in help you away . " " i do n't dispute it , my boy , " the old merchant say meekly . " it be a blessing that you have the foresight to secure it . be you think of make for now ? " " ! , man , the telegraph would have set every gendarme on the coast on the look-out . no , no , that would be a poor hope of safety ! " " where then ? " " where be the fisherman ? " ask suspiciously , peer out from the door into the darkness . " no one must know our destination . we will pick up 's ship , the , in the . she be to have go down the , and to lie at , and then to work round to the , where she will be . it will be a , so no news can get about . if we get away with him they will lose all trace of us . we will get him to land up upon the spanish coast . i think it will fairly puzzle the police . no doubt they be watch every station on the line by this time . i wonder what have become of ? " " i trust that they will hang him , " cry , with a gleam of his old energy . " if he have take the ordinary precaution of make sure who the girl be , this would never have occur . " " do n't throw the blame on him , " say bitterly . " who be it who keep us all up to it whenever we wish to back out ? if it have not be for you , who would have think of it ? " " i act for the good , " cry the old man , throw his hand up with a piteous gesture . " you should be the last to upbraid me . it be the dream of leave you rich and honour which drive me on . i be prepare to do anything for that end . " " you have always excellent intention , " his son say callously . " they have a queer way of show themselves , however . look out , here be ! " as he speak they hear the crunch of the fisherman 's heavy boot on the shingle , and he look in , with his ruddy face all shine with the salt water . " we be all ready now , sir , " he say . " and i will get into our oil dud , and then we can lock up the shop . it will have to take care of itself until we come back . " the two gentleman walk down to the edge of the sea . there be a little dinghy there , and the boat be anchor a couple of hundred yard off . they could just make out the loom of her through the darkness , and see her shadowy spar , dip , rise , and fall with the wash of the wave . to right and leave spread the long white line of thundering foam , as though the ocean be some great beast of prey which be gnash its glisten tooth at them . the gale have partially die away , but there still come fitful gust from the , and the thick cloud overhead be sweep in a majestic procession across the sky , and fall like a dark cataract over the horizon , show that up there at least there be no lull in the tempest . it be bitterly cold , and both man button up their coat and slap their hand against each other to preserve their warmth . after some little delay , and his son come down from the hut with a lantern in each of their hand . they have lock the door behind them , which show that they be ready for a final start . by the light which they carry it could be see that they be dress in yellow suit of oilskin and hat , as if prepare for a wet night . " you ai n't half dress for a cruise of this kind , " say . " you will be nigh soak through , i fear . " " that be our look-out , " answer . " let us get off . " " step in , sir , and we will get in after . " the dinghy be shove off into the surf , and the two seaman clamber in after . and his father sit in the sheet , while the other row . the sea be run very high that when the dinghy lie in the trough of a wave they could see neither the boat for which they be steer nor the shore which they have indeed but the black line of hiss water above their head . at time they would go up until they hang on the crest of a great roller and see the dark valley gape beyond into which they be forthwith precipitate . sometimes , when they be high upon a wave , the would be between the sea , and then there would be nothing of her visible except the upper portion of her mast . it be only a couple of hundred yard , but seem a long journey to the shiver fugitive . " stand by with the boat-hook ! " cry at last . the dark outline of the boat be loom immediately above them . " all right , father . " the dinghy be hold alongside , and the two gentleman scramble aboard as good they could , follow by their companion . " have you the painter , ? " " ay , ay . " " make it fast aft then ! " the lad fasten the rope which hold the dinghy to a stanchion beside the tiller . then he and his father proceed to hoist the foresail so as to get the boat 's head round . " she will do now , " cry . " give us a hand here , sir , if you do n't mind . " catch hold of the rope which be hand him and pull for some time . it be a relief to him to have something , however small , which would distract his mind from the event of the night . " that will do , sir , " the skipper cry , and , lean over the bow , he seize the anchor which have haul up , and tumble it with a crash on the deck . " now , , with three reef in her we might give her the . " with much pull at rope and with many strange nautical cry the father and the son , aid by their passenger , succeed in raise the great brown sail . the little vessel lie over under the pressure of the wind until her lee bulwark be flush with the water , and the deck lie at such an angle that it be only by hold on to the weather rig that the two gentleman could retain their footing . the wild wave swirl and foam round her bow , and beat at her quarter and beneath her counter , but the little boat rise gallantly to them , and shoot away through the storm , run due eastward . " it ai n't much of a cabin , " say apologetically . " such as it be , you will find it down there . " " thank you , " answer ; " we will stay on deck at present . when ought we to get to the ? " " at this rate we will be there by afternoon . " " thank you . " the fisherman and his boy take turn and turn , one steering and the other keep a look-out forward and trim the sail . the two passenger crouch huddle together against the weather rail . they be each too occupy with think to have time for speech . suddenly , after pass and round the point , they come in full sight of the , every window of which be blaze with light . they could see dark figure pass to and fro against the glare . " look there , " whisper . " ay , the police have not take long , " his son answer . be silent for some time . then he suddenly drop his face upon his hand , and sob hoarsely for the first and last time in his career . " i be think of in , " he say . " ! be this the end of a life of hard work ! oh , my business , my business , that i build up myself ! it will break my heart ! " and so through the long cold winter 's night they sit together while the boat plough its way down the . who shall say what their thought be as they stare with pale , rigid face into the darkness , while their mind , perhaps , peer even more cheerlessly into the dismal obscurity which lie over their future . well be the lifeless wreck whom they have carry up to the priory , than be tear as these man be tear , by the demon of fear and remorse and grief , and crush down by the weight of a and irrevocable past . the ruffian be so horror-stricken at the sight of the girl whom he imagine that he have murder , that he lie grovel on the railway line by the side of his victim , moan with terror , and incapable of any resistance . he be promptly seize by the major 's party , and the secure his hand with a handkerchief so quickly and effectively that it be clearly not the first time that he have perform the feat . he then calmly draw a very long and bright knife from the recess of his frock-coat , and have press it against 's nose to ensure his attention , he brandish it in front of him in a menace way , as a hint that an attempt at escape might be dangerous . " and who be ? " ask , lift up the dead woman 's head , and rest it upon his knee . " poor girl ! she will speak again , whoever she may have be , " the major say , hold the lantern to her cold pale face . " here be where the coward strike her . death must have be instantaneous and painless . i could have swear it be the young lady we come , if it be not that we have her safe down there , thank the ! " " be those ? " ask , peer about through the darkness . " if be justice in country , dey hang for the work of night . " " they be off , " the major answer , lay the girl 's head reverently down again . " it be hopeless to follow them , as we know nothing of the , nor which direction they take . they run like madman . ! what the can this be ? " the sight which have attract the veteran 's attention be nothing less than the appearance at the end of the lane of three brilliant luminous disc move along abreast of one another . they come rapidly near , increase in brilliancy as they approach . then a voice ring out of the darkness , " there they be , officer ! close with them ! do n't let ' em get away ! " and before the major and his party could quite grasp the situation they be valiantly charge by three of those , stout-hearted mortal know as the british police force . it take courage to plunge into the boil surf and to carry the rope to the breaking vessel . it take courage to spring from the ship 's side and support the struggle swimmer , never know the moment at which a flicker shadow may appear in the deep green water , and the tiger of the deep turn its white belly upwards as it dash on its prey . there be courage too in the infantryman who take a sturdy grip of his rifle and plant his foot firmly as he see the sweep down on his comrade and himself . but of all these type of bravery there be none that can compare with that of our homely constable when he find on the dark night that a door on his beat be ajar , and , listen below , learn that the time have come to show the manhood that be in him . he must fight odd in the dark . he must , single-handed , cage up desperate man like rat in a hole . he must oppose his simple weapon to the six-shooter and the life-preserver . all these thought , and the remembrance of his wife and child at home , and of how easy it would be not to observe the open door , come upon him , and then what do he do ? why , with the thought of duty in his heart , and his little cudgel in his hand , he go to what be too often his death , like a valiant high-minded englishman , who fear the reproach of his own conscience more than pistol bullet , or bludgeon stroke . which digression may serve to emphasize the fact that these three burly policeman , have be place upon our friend ' track by the ostler of the , and have themselves observe manoeuvre which could only be characterize as suspicious , charge down with such vehemence , that in less time than it take to tell it , both and the major and be in safe custody . the , who have an hatred of the law , and who could never be bring to understand that it might under any circumstance be on his side , pull himself very straight and hold his knife down at his hip as though he mean to use it , while , of , likewise assume an aggressive attitude . fortunately , however , the appearance of their prisoner and a few hurried word from the major make the inspector in charge understand how the land lie , and he transfer his attention to , on whose wrist he place the handcuff . he then listen to a more detailed account of the circumstance from the lip of the major . " who be this young lady ? " he ask , point to . " this be the whom we come to rescue , and for whom no doubt the blow be intend which kill this unhappy girl . " " perhaps , sir , " say the inspector to , " you have well take her up to the house . " " thank you , " say , and go off through the wood with upon his arm . on their way , she tell him how , be unable to find her bonnet and cloak , which have abstract , she have determine to keep her appointment without them . her delay render her a little late , however ; but on reach the wither oak she hear voice and step in front of her , which she have follow . these have lead her to the open gate , and the lighting of the lantern have reveal her to friend and foe . ere she conclude her story notice that she lean more and more heavily upon him , until by the time that they reach the priory he be oblige to lift her up and carry her to prevent her from fall . the hardship of the last few week , and this final terrible and yet most joyful incident of all , have break down her strength . he bear her into the house , and lay her by the fire in the dining-room , watch tenderly over her , and exhaust his humble stock of medical knowledge in devise remedy for her condition . in the meantime the inspector , have thoroughly grasp the major 's lucid narrative , be take prompt and energetic measure . " you go down to the station , , " he order . " wire to , ' , age , and his son , age , want for murder . address , and , . ' a description of them . ' , six foot one inch in height , , grey hair and whisker , deep-set eye , heavy brow , round shoulder . , five foot ten , , black eye , black curly hair , strongly make , leg rather bandy , well dress , usually wear a dog 's head scarf-pin . ' that ought to do ! " " yes , that be near enough , " observe the major . " wire to every station along the line to be on the look-out . send a description to the chief constable of , and have a watch keep on the shipping . that should catch them ! " " it , " cry confidentially . " i will bet money it . " it be as well that the german 's sporting offer find no taker , otherwise our good friend would have be a poor man . " let us carry the poor soul up to the house , " the inspector continue , after make careful examination of the ground all round the body . the party assist in raise the girl up , and in carry her back along the path by which she have be bring . tramp stolidly along behind with the remain policeman beside him . the bring up the rear with his keen eye fix upon the navvy , and his knife still ready for use . when they reach the priory the prisoner be safely lock away in one of the numerous empty room , while be carry upstairs and lay upon the very bed which have be hers . " we must search the house , " the inspector say ; and have be bring out of her room , and have forthwith faint and be revive again , be order to accompany the police in their investigation , which she do in a very daze and stupefy manner . indeed , not a word could be get from her until , enter the dining-room , she perceive her bottle of upon the table , on which she raise up her voice and curse the whole company , from the inspector downwards , with the shrill volubility of invective . have satisfy her soul in this manner , she wind up by a perfect shriek of profanity , and break away from her guardian , she regain the shelter of her room and lock herself up there , after which they could hear by the drum of her heel that she go into a violent hysterical attack upon the floor . have , however , recover sufficiently to be able to show the police the different room , and to explain to them which be which . the inspector examine the scanty furniture of 's apartment with great interest . " you say you have be live here for three week ? " he say . " nearly a month , " answer . " help you ! no wonder you look pale and ill . you have a fine prospect from the window . " he draw the blind aside and look out into the darkness . a gleam of moonlight lie upon the heave ocean , and in the centre of this silver streak be a single run to the eastward before the wind . the inspector 's keen eye rest upon it for an instant , and then he drop the blind and turn away . it never flash across his mind that the man whom he be hunt down could have choose that mean of escape , and be already beyond his reach . he examine very carefully the room of and of his father . both have be furnish comfortably , if not solidly , with spring mattress to their bed and carpet upon the floor . the young man 's room have little in it beyond the mere furniture , which be natural , as his visit be so short . in the merchant 's chamber , however , be many book and paper . on the little square table be a long slip of foolscap cover with complex figure . it appear to be a statement of his affair , in which he have be compute the liability of the firm . by the side of it be a small diary . the inspector glance over one of the page and utter an exclamation of disgust . " here be some pretty entry , " he cry . " ' the working of grace within me ! ' ' that i might be give a lively interest in the ! ' the book be full of that sort of thing ! " he add , turn over the leave . " the fellow seem to have play the hypocrite even with himself , for he could never have know that other eye would rest upon this . " " will be some queer company among elect if he be ! " remark . " what be all this ? " ask the inspector , tumble a heap of clothes out of the corner with his foot . " why , here be a monk 's dress ! " spring forward at the word . " then i do see him ! " she cry . " i have almost persuade myself that it be a dream . " " what be that ? " tell her story as well as she could , and the inspector make note of it . " the crafty old dog ! " he cry . " no doubt he could reconcile it with his conscience more easily to frighten you to death than to actually kill you . he tell you that story to excite your imagination , and then , feel sure that you would sooner or later try and escape by night , he keep guard in this rig . the only wonder be that he do n't succeed in either kill you or drive you mad with fright . " " never mind now , dear , " whisper , as he see the look of fear spring into her eye at the recollection of what have pass . " do n't think of these terrible thing . you will soon be safe in in my mother 's arm . in the meanwhile , i think you would be the good for some sleep . " " i think i should , . " " be you afraid to sleep in your own room ? " " no ; i be afraid of nothing , now that i know you be near me . i know so well that you would come . i have be expect you all the evening . " " i can never thank my good friend here enough for the help which they have give me ! " exclaim , turn to his companion . " it be i who should thank them , " say earnestly , " i have find friend , indeed . who can say now that the day of chivalry be past ? " " me dear young lady , " the major answer , bow with all the innate grace of an irish gentleman , " have warm us by what say . i personally be , as know , under order which leave me no choice but to come . i hope , however , that will believe that have not occupy the place in me affection which she do , i should still be as prompt as me friend here to hasten to the rescue of a lady . may be , , but his heart will grow so harden but that it will milt at the thought of beauty in . " with this beautiful sentiment the major place his fat hand over his heart , and bow again , even more gracefully than before . the three foreigner behind make no remark , but they all stand in a line grin in a most amicable fashion , and nod their head as if to intimate that the major be express their unite sentiment to a nicety . 's last recollection of that eventful evening be the smile visage of , , and the nameless russian as they beam their good night at her . have give many indication during his life , both in and elsewhere , of be possess of the power of grasp a situation and of act for the good at the short notice . he never show this quality more conclusively than at that terrible moment , when he realize not only that the crime in which he bad participate have fail , but that all be discover , and that his father and he be hunt criminal . with the same intuitive quickness which make him a brilliant man of business , he see instantly what be the only available mean of escape , and proceed at once to adopt them . if they could but reach the vessel of they might defy the pursuit of the law . the have drop down the on the very which be so fruitful of eventful episode . would lie at , and intend afterwards to beat round to the , there to await the final instruction of the firm . if they could catch him before he leave , there be very little chance that he would know anything of what have occur . it be a fortunate chance that the next day be , and there would be no morning paper to enlighten him as to the doings in . they have only to invent some plausible excuse for their wish to accompany him , and get him to drop them upon the spanish coast . once out of sight of and on the broad ocean , what detective could follow their track ? of course upon 's return all would come out . reckon , however , that it would be some time before the fisherman get back from his journey . what be a favourable wind going would be dead in his tooth come back . it might take him a week be tack and beat about before he get home . by that time hope to be beyond the reach of all danger . he have a thousand five pound of note sew into the back of his waistcoat , for know that a crash might come at any moment , he have long make provision against it . with this he feel that he could begin life again in the new world , and with his youth and energy he might hope to attain success . as to his father , he be fully determine to abandon him completely at the first opportunity . through the whole of that wintry night the scud away to the eastward , and the two fugitive remain upon deck , drench through with rain and with spray , but feel that the wild turmoil around them be welcome as a relief to their own thought . well the cutting wind and the angry sea than the thought of the dead girl upon the rail and of the bloodhound of the law . point up once at the moon , on whose face two storm wreath have mark a rectangular device . " look at that ! " he cry . " it look like a gallows . " " what be there to live for ? " say his father , look up with the cold light glitter on his deep-set eye . " not much for you , perhaps , " his son retort . " you have have your fling , but i be young and have not yet have a fair show . i have no fancy to be scrag yet . " " poor lad ! " the father mutter ; " poor lad ! " " they have n't catch me yet , " say . " if they do i question whether they could do much . they could n't hang three for the death of one . you would have to swing , and that be about all . " about two in the morning they see a line of light , which the fisherman inform them be from the town of . again before daybreak they scud past another and far bright and large area of twinkle point , which mark the position of . they be nearly half-way upon their journey already . as the dawn approach the dark storm-cloud gather away to the northern horizon and lay in a great shadow over the coast . on all other point the sky be clear , save that here and there a single puff of white vapour sail along like the feather of some gigantic bird float in the ocean of air . these isolated cloud , which have be pearly grey in the dim light of early day , gradually take a lilac tint , which deepen into pink , and then blush suddenly to a fiery scarlet as the red rim of the sun rise majestically over the horizon . all the heaven be fill with colour from the pale , light blue at the zenith to the most brilliant crimson in the east , as though it be nature 's palette on which she have dash every tint that she possess . the sea reflect the rich glow , and the toss wave be gash with scarlet streak . " it look like a sea of blood , " the merchant remark with a shudder , as he gaze at the wonderful spectacle . by the return light the two fugitive be able to notice each other 's appearance . both be pale , haggard , dishevelled , with bloodshot , eye and anxious , weary face . " this wo n't do ! " remark . " if see us like this he will smell a rat . " he dip a bucket overboard , and after some search a small piece of soap and a break comb be extract from one of the locker . with these material they manage to perform their toilet . they and clean each other 's clothing too , and purchase a from for his father , the jaunty nature of which contrast strangely with the old man 's grim angular visage . " there be a fine view ! " observe , point towards the land , just as his two passenger have finish their toilet . they be pass a high range of cliff which run along for a great distance . some be of chalk and other be brownish , as though consist of some sort of earth . there be one which terminate the line towering up above the rest , and as remarkable for the boldness of its outline as for its height . a lighthouse stand upon the summit , and the whole show up so clearly in the bright morning air that the fugitive could see the green grass round the house and the at the signal station , who be stroll leisurely about and look down from his elevation at their little craft . to the eastward of this chalk promontory be a large town , which stretch in a wide semicircle round the shore of a curve bay . " that be , " say , point at the cliff . " it be the down , and they have a look-out place up there to report ship as pass . it be a as put it up . i n't know who he be , that same , but he do seem to take a powerful deal of interest in which have to do ' shipping . he be an admiral belike , or something o ' the sort . " neither of the appear incline to enlighten him upon the point . " what be the town ? " ask . " , " the fisherman answer shortly , and lounge away into the bow , while his son remain at the tiller . the two fugitive have their breakfast ; but as it consist of nothing more appetising than tinned and ship ' biscuit , and as neither of them have much inclination for food , it be not a very lengthy meal . then they sit in the sheet once more , watch the grand panorama of green woodland and swell down and towering cliff , which pass before them on the one side while on the other the great ocean highway be dot with every variety of vessel , from the ketch or the brig , with its cargo of coal , to the majestic liner which sweep past , with the green wave swirl round her forefoot and break away into a fork of eddy water in her wake . caution his father to sit down , for he observe a row of curious face gaze at them over the quarter of one great vessel . " our dress be n't quite what you would expect to see in a , " he say . " there be no use set tongue wag . " there be still a fresh breeze , and the little boat continue to fly before it at the rate of six or eight knot . " this wind be a lucky chance , " remark , rather to himself than to his companion . " it be the working of , " answer , with an earnestness which show that his mind still retain its habitual peculiarity . by ten o'clock they be abreast of the long stone terrace of ; at eleven they see the mast of the of . by one they be round the sharp bold promontory of . they keep further to sea after that , so that the long white wall and the spire of and of lie far on the horizon . on the other side a dim haze upon the blue water mark the position of the french coast . it be nearly five , and the sun be begin to sink down again in the west , when the fisherman , after gaze steadily ahead for some time , with his horny hand shade his eye , touch on the sleeve . " see them breaker over there , " he say , point over the starboard bow . far away could see a long roll of foam break the monotony of the broad stretch of ocean . " them be the , " he go on ; " and them craft ahead be at anchor in the . " the vessel in question be mile away , but brighten up at the sight of their destination , and he once again arrange his toilet and that of his father . " thank goodness ! " he mutter , with a long sigh of relief as he peer at the ship , which be grow clear and large every moment . " that outer one be the , or i be much mistake . he be not go yet ! " " that be the , " his father say with confidence . " i know her by the cut of her stern and the rake of her mast . " as they come near still , any linger doubt be finally dispel . " there be the white paint line , " say . " it be certainly her . take us alongside that ship which be lie to the outside there , . " the fisherman look ahead once more . " to the barque which have just get her anchor up ? " he say . " why , we wo n't be in time to catch her . " " her anchor up ! " scream . " you do n't mean to tell me she be off ! " " look at that ! " the man answer . as he speak they see first one great square of canvas appear above the vessel , and then another , until she have spread her white wing to their full extent . " do n't say we ca n't catch her ! " cry , with a furious oath . " i tell you , man , that we must catch her . everything depend on that . " " she must take three short tack before she be out from the . if we run right on as we be go , we may get near her before she be free . " " for 's sake ! clap on all the sail you can ! get these reef out ! " with tremble finger let out the sail , and the boat lie over further under the increase pressure . " be there no other sail that we could put up ? " " if we be run , we could rig up a spinnaker , " the fisherman answer ; " but the wind have come round three point . we can do no more . " " i think we be catch her , " cry , keep his eye fix upon the barque , which be about a mile and a half ahead . " yes , we be now , but she hai n't get her way on yet . she will draw ahead presently ; wo n't she , ? " the fisherman 's son nod , and burst into hoarse merriment . " it be a race , " he cry . " with our neck for a prise , " mutter to himself . " it be a little too exciting to be pleasant . we be still gain . " they have a clear view of the dark hull and towering canvas of the barque as she sweep along in front of them , intend evidently to take advantage of the wind in order to get outside the before beat up . " she be go about , " remark . as he speak the snow-white pile lie over in the opposite direction , and the whole broadside of the vessel become visible to them , every sail stand out as though carve from ivory against the cold blue sky . " if we do n't catch her on this tack we wo n't get her at all , " the fisherman observe . " when they put about next they will reach right out into the . " " where be something white ? " say excitedly . he dive into the cabin and reappear with a dirty table-cloth . " stand up here , father ! now keep on wave it ! they may see you . " " i think as we be ' of them , " remark the boy . " we be do that , " his father answer . " the question be , will we get near enough to stop ' em afore they get off on the next tack ? " the old merchant be stand in the bow wave the signal in the air . his son spring up beside him and flourish his handkerchief . " they do n't look more than half a mile off . let us shout together . " the two blend their voice in a hoarse roar , which be take up by the boatman and his son . " once again ! " cry ; and again their shout resound over the cry it be , with a ring of despair and of sorrow . still the barque keep steadily on her way . " if they do n't go about we shall catch them , " the fisherman say . " if they keep on another five minute we be right . " " do you hear that ? " cry to his father ; and they both shout with new energy and wave their signal . " they be ' about , " burst in . " it be all up . " groan as he see the swing back . they all strain their eye , wait for the other to follow . it remain stationary . " they have see us ! " cry the fisherman . " they be ' to pick us up ! " " then we be save ! " say , step down and wipe the perspiration which pour from his forehead . " go down into the cabin , father , and put yourself straight . you look like a ghost . " have find the liquor of the and so very much to his taste , in spite of its vitriolic peculiarity record in a preceding chapter , that he rejoin his ship in a very shaky and demoralize condition . he be a devout believer in the homoeopathic revelation that like may be cure by like , so he forthwith proceed to set himself straight by the consumption of an unlimited quantity of ship 's rum . " what be the good of have a pilot aboard if i be to keep sober ? " he hiccough to his mate . after which piece of logic he shut himself up in his cabin and roar comic song all the way from to . he be so exhaust by his performance that he fall fast asleep , and snore stertorously for fifteen hour , at the end of which time he come on deck and find that the be lie off deal , and that her anchor be just be hoist for a start up . watch the with his hand in his pocket , and swear promiscuously at every one , from the mate downwards , in a hearty comprehensive way , which show a mind that be superior to petty distinction . have run over all the oath that he could think of , he dive below and help himself from the rum bottle , a process which appear to aid his memory or his invention , for he reappear upon deck and evolve a new expletive at the man at the wheel . he then stride in gloomy majesty up and down the quarter-deck , cast his eye at the sail and at the cloud in a critical way calculate to impress the crew generally with a sense of their captain 's extraordinary sagacity . the have go about for the second time , and be just about to free herself from the and reach out into the , when ' eye happen to fall upon the fishing boat in pursuit and the white flutter in her bow . he examine her with his glass , steady it as well as he could by lean it across the rail , as his hand be very shaky . after a short inspection , a look of astonishment , follow by one of resignation , steal over his feature . " i have get them again , , " he remark to the mate . " get what , sir ? " " the , the jump , the vision . it be the change of air as have do it . " " you look all right , " remark the mate in a sympathetic voice . " so i may ; but i have get ' em . it be usually , and sometimes cockroach ; but it be bad than that this time . as i be a ' man , i look through the glass at that astern of us , and i see young in it , and the old boss standin ' up ' a at the side of his head and wave a towel . this be the smart bout that ever i have have . i will take some of the medicine leave from my last touch and i will turn in . " he vanish down the companion , and have take a strong dose of bromide of potassium , tumble into his bunk , curse loudly at his ill luck . the astonishment of upon deck be as great as that of , when , on look through the glass , he ascertain beyond all doubt that both of his employer be in the . he at once order the to be haul back and await their arrival . in a few minute the boat be alongside , a ladder throw down , and the two be on the deck of their own ship . " where be the captain ? " ask the head of the firm . " he be below , sir . he be no very salubrious . " the mate 's love of long word rise superior to any personal emotion . " you can square the yard , " say . " we be go with you . " " ay , ay , sir . square away that yard there ! " it swing round into position , and the resume her voyage . " there be some business to be look after in , " remark to . " it come up suddenly or we should have give you notice . it be absolutely necessary that we should be there personally . it be more convenient to go in our own vessel than to wait for a passenger ship . " " where will you sleep , sir ? " ask the mate . " i doubt the accommodation be no very munificent . " " there be two settee in the cabin . we can do on them very well . i think we ca n't do well than go down there at once , for we have have a long and tire journey . " after they have disappear into the cabin , tread the deck for the remainder of his watch with a grave and a thoughtful face . like most of his countryman he be shrewd and long-headed . it strike him that it be a very strange thing for the two partner to be absent at the same time from their business . again , where be their luggage ? grave misgiving arise in his mind as to the reason of it all . he keep them to himself , however , and content himself with remark to the carpenter that in all his experience he have never meet with a more " episode . " the early part of the voyage of the be extremely fortunate . the wind come round to the eastward , and waft them steadily down , until on the third day they see the of lie low upon the . no inquisitive gunboat or lurk police launch come within sight of them , though whenever any vessel 's course bring her in their direction the heart of sink within him . on one occasion a small brig signal to them , and the wretched fugitive , when they see the flag run up , think that all be lose . it prove , however , to be merely some trivial message , and the two owner breathe again . the wind fall away on the day that they clear the , and the whole surface of the sea be like a great expanse of quicksilver , which shimmer in the ray of the wintry sun . there be still a considerable swell after the recent gale , and the lie roll about as though she have learn habit of inebriation from her skipper . the sky be very clear above , but all round the horizon a low haze lie upon the water . so silent be it that the creak of the boat as they swing at the davit , and the straining of the shroud as the ship roll , sound loud and clear , as do the raucous cry of a couple of gull which hover round the poop . every now and then a rumble noise end in a thud down below show that the swing of the ship have cause something to come down with a run . underlie all other sound , however , be a muffle clank , clank , which might almost make one forget that this be a sailing ship , it sound so like the chipping of a propeller . " what be that noise , ? " ask as he stand lean over the quarter rail , while the old sea-dog , sextant in hand , be take his midday observation . the captain have be on his good behaviour since the unexpected advent of his employer , and he be now in a wonderful and unprecedented state of sobriety . " them be the pump ' , " answer , pack his sextant away in its case . " the pump ! i think they be only use when a ship be in danger ? " come along the deck at this moment , and listen with interest to the conversation . " this ship be in danger , " remark calmly . " in danger ! " cry , look round the clear sky and placid sea . " where be the danger ? i do not think you be such an old woman , . " " we will see about that , " the seaman answer angrily . " if a ship have get no bottom in her she be bind to be in danger , be the weather fair or foul . " " do you mean to tell me this ship have no bottom ? " " i mean to tell you that there be place where you could put your finger through her seam . it be only the ' that keep her afloat . " " this be a pretty state of thing , " say . " how be it that i have not be inform of it before ! it be most dangerous . " " inform ! " cry . " inform of it ! have there be a yet that i have n't come to , , and tell i be surprise ever to find myself back in ? a year agone i tell how this ship be , and laugh at me , do . it be only when find on her in the middle o ' the broad sea that ' what it be that sailor folk have to put up ' . " be about to make some angry reply to this address , but his son put his hand on his arm to restrain him . it would never do to quarrel with before they reach their port of refuge . they be too completely in his power . " what the captain say have a great deal of truth in it , " he remark , with a laugh . " you do n't realize a thing until you have have to experience it . the shall certainly have an overhaul next time , and we will see if we ca n't give her captain an increase at the same time . " give a grunt which , might be take as express thank or as signify doubt . perhaps there be a mixture of both in his mind . " i presume , " say , in a conciliatory voice , " that there would be no real danger as long as the weather be fine ? " " it wo n't be fine long , " the captain answer gruffly . " the glass be well under thirty when i come up , and it be ' fast . i have be about here before at this time o ' year in a calm , with a ground swell and a ' glass . no good ever come of it . look there at the . what make o ' that , ? " " in conjunction ' the descend glass , it have an ominous , " the scotchman answer , with much stress on the first syllable of the adjective . the phenomenon which have attract their professional attention do not appear to either of the to be a very important one . the haze on the horizon to the north be rather thick than elsewhere , and a few thin streaky cloud straggle upwards across the clear cold heaven , like the feeler of some giant octopus which lie behind the fog bank . at the same time the sea change in place from the appearance of quicksilver to that of grain glass . " there be the wind , " say confidently . " i will furl the top-gallant sail and get her down , . " whenever he give an order he be careful to give the mate his full title , though at other time he call him indiscriminately or . the mate give the necessary command , while dive down into the cabin . he come up again look even grave than when he leave the deck . " the glass be nearly down to , " he say . " i never seed it as low since i have be at sea . take in the , , and have the topsail reef down ! " " ay , ay , sir . " there be no lack of noise now as the man haul at the halliard with their shrill strange cry , which sound like the piping of innumerable . half a dozen lie out on the yard above , tuck away the great sail and make all snug . " take a reef in the ! " the mate roar , " and look alive about it ! " " hurry up , swab ! " bellow . " you will be blow away , every mother 's son of , if you do n't stir ! " even the two landsman could see now that the danger be no imaginary one , and that a storm be about to burst over them . the long black line of vapour have lengthen and coalesce , until now the whole northern heaven be one great rolling black cloud , with an angry , ragged fringe which bespeak the violence of the wind that drive it . here and there against the deep black background a small whitish or wreath stand clearly out , look livid and dangerous . the whole great mass be sweep onwards with prodigious and majestic rapidity , darken the ocean beneath it , and emit a dull , moan , mutter sound , which be indescribably menace and mournful . " this may be the same gale as be on some day ago , " remark . " they travel in circle very often , and come back to where they start from . " " we be all snug aloft , but this ship wo n't stand much knock about , an ' that be a fact , " observe the mate gloomily . it be blow now in short frequent puff , which ruffle the surface of the water , and cause the to surge slowly forward over the roller . a few drop of rain come patter down upon the deck . the great bank of cloud be above the ship , still hurry wildly across the heaven . " look out ! " cry an old quartermaster . " here she come ! " as he speak the storm burst with a shriek , as though all the demon of the air have be suddenly unchain and be rejoice in their freedom . the force of the blast be so great that could almost have believe that he have be strike by some solid object . the barque heel over until her lee rail touch the water , and lie so for a minute or more in a smother of foam . her deck be at such an angle that it seem as though she never could right herself . gradually , however , she rise a little , staggered and tremble like a live thing , and then plunge away through the storm , as a piece of paper be whirl before the wind . by evening the gale be at its height . the be run under maintopsail and foretopmast staysail . the sea have rise very quickly , as it will when wind come upon a swell . as far as the eye could see from the summit of a wave there be a vista of dark towering ridge with their threaten crest of foam . when the barque sink in the hollow these gleam summit rise as high as her , and the two fugitive , cling to the , look up in terror and amazement at the mass of water which hang above them . once or twice wave actually break over the vessel , crash and roar down the deck , and wash hither and thither until gradually absorb between the plank or drain away through the . on each of these occasion the poor rotten vessel would lurch and shiver in every plank , as if with a foreknowledge of her fate . it be a dreary night for all on board . as long as there be light they could at least see what danger be to be face , but now the barque be plunge and toss through an inky obscurity . with a wild scoop motion she be hurl up on the summit of a great wave , and thence she shoot down into the black gulf beyond with such force that when check by meet the next billow her whole fabric jar from truck to keelson . there be two seaman at the wheel and two at the relieve tackle , yet it be all that they could do among the wild commotion to keep her steady . no one thought of go below . it be well to see and know the bad than to be shut up in a coffin where one could not stretch out a hand to help one 's self . once claw his way along the rail to where the be stand . " look there ! " he roar , point to windward . it be difficult to turn one 's face straight to the wild rush of wind and spray and hail . shade their eye , they peer into the storm . right in the heart of it , and apparently not more than a couple of hundred yard from the barque , be a lurid glare of ruddy light , rise and fall with the sea , but advance rapidly through it . there be a bright central glowing spot , with small light glimmer above and beside it . the effect of the single glare of light against the inky darkness of the sea and sky would have make a study for a . " what be that ? " " it be a steamer , " the captain shout . it be only by great exertion that he could make himself audible above the shriek of the wind and the dash of the wave . " what do you think of it all ? " ask . " very bad , " answer . " could n't be bad ; " and with that he claw his way aft again , grasp every stanchion or shroud on his way , like a in a cage . the cloud above break somewhat towards morning , but there be no sign of abatement in the tempest . here and there through the rift the glimmer of the star might be see , and once the pale moon gleam through the storm wreath . the dawn break cheerless and dreary , disclose the great turmoil of endless wave and the solitary little barque , with her rag of canvas , like a seabird , stagger to the south . even the have notice that , whereas towards the commencement of the storm it have be a rare occurrence for a wave to break over the ship , the deck be now continually knee-deep in water , and there be a constant splash and crash as the sea curl over the weather bulwark . have already observe it , and confer gravely with his mate on the point . " i do n't like the look of her , , " he shout . " she do n't rise to them . " " she be near water-logged , i be ' , " the mate respond gravely . he know the danger , and his thought be wander away to a little cottage near . it be true that there be not much in it save a wife , who be say to give the rough side of her tongue , and occasionally something rough still . affection be a capricious emotion , however , and will cling to the most unlikely object ; so the big scotchman 's eye be damp with something else beside the sea spray as he realize that he might never look upon cottage or occupant again . " no wonder , " say , " when she be takin ' in water above and below too . the man be weary ' ' , and it still gain . " " i it be our last , " the mate remark , his scottish accent wax broad under the influence of emotion . " what say to ' her to ? " " i will let her run on . she would na rise the wave , i be ' . we canna be fa ' frae the spanish coast , ' to my . that gie us a chance o ' savin ' , though i be a fear na boat would live in a sea . " " you be right . we have a good chance so than if we let her ride . she will founder as sure as egg be egg . damn it , , i could almost be glad this have happen now we have get them two aboard . we will teach ' em what coffin ship be like in a gale o ' wind . " the rough seaman laugh hoarsely as he speak . the carpenter come aft at this moment , balance himself as good he could , for the deck be only a few degree off the perpendicular . " the leak be gain fast , " he say . " the hand be clean do up . there be land on the port bow . " the mate and the captain peer out through the dense wrack and haze . a great dark cliff loom out upon the left , jagged , inhospitable , and menace . " we will well run towards it , " the mate say . " we have na chance o ' save the ship , but we might run her ashore . " " the ship will go down before you reach it , " the carpenter remark gloomily . " keep your heart up ! " shout , and then crawl along to the . " there be no hope for the ship but we may save ourselves , " he say . " you will have to take your turn at the pump . " they follow him forward without a word . the crew , listless and weary , be group about the pump . the feeble clank sound like the ticking of a watch amid the horrible uproar which fill the air . " buckle to again , boy ! " cry . " these two will help you and the carpenter and mate . " and his father , the old man 's grizzled lock fly wildly from his head , seize the rope and work with the crew , hardly able to retain their foothold upon the slippery sloping deck . go down into the cabin . his behaviour during the gale have be most exemplary , but he recognize now that there be nothing more to be do , and , have throw off his public responsibility , he renew his private peculiarity . he fill out nearly a of raw rum and take it off at a gulp . then he begin to sing and make his way on deck in a very hilarious and reckless mood . the vessel be still fly towards the rugged line of cliff , which be now visible along the whole horizon , the great projection on the left be their culminate point . she be obviously sink low in the water , and she plunge in a heavy , sulky manner through the wave , instead of rise to them as she do before . the water be steadily gain in her interior , and it be clear that she would not float long . the straining of the gale have increase the long-neglect rift between her timber , and no amount of pump could save her . on the other hand , the sky have break above them , and the wind be by no mean so violent as before . the sun break through between two great hurry cloud , and turn all the wave to the bright emerald green , with sparkling snow-white crest of foam . this sudden change and the brightness of the scene make their fate seem all the harder to the seaman aboard the sink vessel . " the gale be ' , " remark . " if we have have a ship that rotten to the , like her owner , we have through . " " right you be , old ! but we be all ' together , captain and owner and the whole ' , " yell recklessly . the mate look at him half in surprise and half in contempt . " you have be at the bottle , " he say . " mun , mun , if we be a ' , as seem likely , it be an ' thing to appear before your ' your soul a ' steep in drink . " " you go down and have a drink yourself , " cry huskily . " , na . if i be to , i will sober . " " you will die a fool , " the skipper shout wrathfully . " well , old preacher , you have bring us into a nice hole with your damned insurance cheating , cheese-paring business . what think of it now , when the ship 's ' down under our foot , ? would you repair her if you have her back in the , ? " this speech be address to the old merchant , who have cease pump , and be lean against the cuddy and look up hopelessly at the long line of brown cliff which be now only half a mile away . they could hear the roar of the surf , and see the white breaker where the storm in all its fury against nature 's . " he be not fit to command , " say to the mate . " what would you advise ? " " we will bring her round and lower the boat on the lee side . they may live or no , but it be the only chance for us . them boat will hold us a ' easy . " the ship be settle down in the water so fast that it be no difficult matter to let the boat down . they only hang a few foot above the surface . the majority of the crew get safely into the long boat , and the , with and four seaman , occupy the gig . it be no easy thing to prevent the boat from be stove , as the wave alternately drive them from the ship 's side or bring the two together with a force which seem irresistible . by skilful management , however , they both succeed in cast off and get clear without accident . it be only when they emerge from under the shelter of the vessel that they feel the full power of the sea . if it have appear stupendous when they tread the deck of the barque , how much more so now , when , by lean the arm over the side , they could touch the surface . the great glassy green billow hurl them up and down , and toss them and buffet them as though the two boat be their plaything , and they be try what antic they could perform with them without destroy them . sit very grim and pale , with at his side . the young fellow 's expression be that of a daring man who realize his danger , but be determine to throw no chance of safety away . his mouth be set firm and hard , and his dark eyebrow be draw down over his keen eye , which glance swiftly to right and leave , like a rat in a trap . hold the tiller , and laugh from time to time in a drunken fashion , while the four seaman , quiet and subdue , steady the boat as long as they could with their oar , and look occasionally over their shoulder at the breaker behind them . the sun be shine on the rugged precipice , show out the green turf upon their summit and a little dark group of peasant , who be watch the scene from above , but make no effort to assist the castaway . there be no alternative but to row straight in for the near point of land , for the boat be fill , and might go down at any moment . " the ship be go ! " say , as they rise on the summit of a wave . when they come up again all look round , but there be no sign of the ill-fated " we will all be go when we get among the breaker , " shout . " pull , devil , pull ! beat the mate 's boat . it be a race , my lad , and the ' post be hell . " glance at his father , and see that his lip be move tremulously as they patter forth prayer . " still at it ! " he say , with a sneer . " make my peace , " the old man say solemnly . " my faith be now indeed a staff and a comfort . i look back at my long life , and though i humbly confess that i have err , and err grievously , still in the main i have walk straight . from my youth i have be frugal and industrious . oh , my boy , look with candid eye into your own heart , and see if you be fit to be call away . " " look to your own beam , " answer , keep his eye upon the line of boil surf , which come near and near every moment . " how about 's daughter , ? " even at that awful hour feel a sinister pleasure at observe the spasm which shoot across his father 's face at the mention of his ward . " if i sin i sin for a worthy purpose , " he answer . " it be to preserve my business . its fall be a blow to righteousness and a triumph to evil . into hand i commend my spirit ! " as he speak a great wave hurl the boat in upon its broad bosom , and fling it down upon the cruel jagged rock , which bristle from the base of the cliff . there be a horrible rend crash , and the stout keel snap asunder , while a second wave sweep over it , tear out the struggle occupant and bear them on , only to hurl them upon a second ridge beyond . the peasant upon the cliff give piteous cry of grief and pity , which blend with the agonize groan and scream of drown man and the thunder of the pitiless surge . look down they could see the black dot , which indicate the head of the poor wretch below , diminish one by one as they be hurl upon the rock or drag down by the . be a strong swimmer , but when he have shake himself free of the boat , and kick away a seaman who cling to him , he make no attempt to strike out . he know that the wave would bear him quickly enough on to the rock , and he reserve himself for the struggle with them . a great roller come surge over the outlying reef . it carry him in like a feather and hurl him up against the face of the cliff . as he struggle upon its crest , he mechanically put out his hand and seize a project portion of the rock . the shock of the contact be tremendous , but he retain his grasp and find himself , when the wave recede , stand battered and breathless upon a small niche in the front of the rock which just give him foothold . it be a marvellous escape , for look on either side he could not see any break in the sheer declivity . he be by no mean safe as yet . if a wave have land him there another might come as high and drag him away . look down he see one or two small one break into spray far below him , and then a second great green billow come roll majestically towards him . he eye it as it come foam in , and calculate that it would come at least as high as his knee . would it drag him back with it , or could he hold his own ? he brace himself as firmly as he could , place his foot apart , and dig his nail into the inequality of the rock until the blood gush from them . the water surge up upon him , and he feel it tug like some murderous demon at his leg , but he hold on bravely until the pressure decrease . look below the see the wave sink down the face of the cliff . another wave overtake it and well it up again , and then from the depth of the green water see a long white arm shoot up , and grasp the edge of the ledge upon which he stand . even before the face appear the young man know that the hand be his father 's . a second follow the first , and then the old merchant 's face be uplift from the wave . he be cruelly bruise and batter , and his clothes have be partly tear away . he recognize his son , however , and look up at him beseechingly , while he hold on with all his strength to the ledge of rock . so small be the space that his cling finger touch 's toe . " there be no room here , " the young man say brutally . " for 's sake ! " " hardly room for one . " the merchant be hang with the low portion of his body in the water . it be but a few instant , but the old man have time to think of many an incident in his past life . once more he see the darken sick-room , and his own form standing by the bed of the die man . what be these word which ring in his ear above the crash of the surf ? " may your flesh and blood treat you as you treat her . " he look up appeal at his son . see that the next wave would lift him right up on to the ledge . in that case he might be hustle off . " leave go ! " he cry . " help me , . " his son bring down his heavy heel upon the bloodless hand . the old african trader give a wild shriek and fall back into the sea . look down , see his despair face gaze at him through the water . slowly it sink until it be but a flicker white patch far down in the green depth . at the same instant a thick rope come dangle down the face of the cliff , and the young man know that he be save . be the excitement of the worthy couple at when be bring back to them . good press her to her ample bosom and kiss her , and scold her , and weep over her , while the doctor be so move that it be only by assume an expression of portentous severity and by bellow and stamp about that he be able to keep himself in decent control . " and you really think we have forget you because we be insane enough to stop write at that villain 's request ? " he say , pat 's pale cheek tenderly and kiss her . " i be very foolish , " she say , blush prettily and rearrange her hair , which have be somewhat tumble by her numerous caress . " oh , that pair of scoundrel ! " roar the doctor , shake his fist and dance about on the hearth-rug . " they may catch ' em before the trial come off ! " the good physician 's prayer be not answer in this case , for be the only criminal who appear in the dock . our friend all go down to the to give evidence , and the navvy be duly convict of the death of and condemn to death . he be execute some three week afterwards , die as he have live , stolid and . there be a little church not far from , in which a little clergyman preach every out of a very shabby pulpit . it lie in , which be a narrow by-way , and the great crowd of church-goer ebb and flow within a hundred yard of it , but none know of its existence , for it have never rise to the dignity of a spire , and the bell be so very diminutive that the average muffin man produce quite as much noise . hence , with the exception of some few family who have chance to find their way there , and have be so please with their spiritual welcome that they have return , there be a poor and fluctuate congregation . so scanty be it that the struggle incumbent could very well weep when he have spend the week in polish and strengthen his sermon , and then find upon the how very scanty be the audience to whom it be to be address . imagine , then , this good man 's surprise when ask to publish the banns of marriage of two couple simultaneously , each of whom he know to be in the upper circle of life , and when inform at the same time that the say marriage be actually to be celebrate under his own auspice and in his own church . in the fullness of his heart he at once buy a most black bonnet with lilac flower and red berry , which he bring in triumph to his wife , who , good woman , affect extreme delight , and afterwards cut away all the obnoxious finery and replace it to her own taste . the scanty congregation be no less surprised when they hear that , , be about to marry , widow , and that , bachelor , be to do as much to , spinster . they communicate the tidings to their friend , and the result be a great advertisement to the little church , so that the incumbent preach his favourite sermon upon barren fig tree to a crowded audience , and receive such an offertory as have never enter into his wild dream . and if this be an advertisement to the church , how much more so be it when the very pompous carriage come roll up with their very pompous driver , all of whom , be married man , have a depreciatory and weary expression upon their face , to show that they have do it all before and that it be nothing new to them . out of the one carriage there jump a very jaunty gentleman , somewhat past the middle age and a little incline to stoutness , but look very healthy and rosy nevertheless . besides him there walk a tall , man , who glance solicitously every now and again at his companion , as though he be the at a prize-fight and fear that his man might collapse at a moment 's notice . from a second carriage there emerge an athletic young fellow accompany by a small wizened gentleman in spotless attire , who be in such a state of nervousness that he drop his lavender glove twice on his way up the aisle . these gentleman group themselves at the end of the church converse in low whisper and look exceedingly uncomfortable , as be the prerogative of the stern sex under such circumstance . , who be 's good man , be introduce to , and every one be very affable and nervous . now there come a rustle of drapery , and every one turn their head as the bride sweep up to the altar . here be , look quite as charming as she do fifteen year ago on the last occasion when she perform the ceremony . she be dress in a french grey gown with bonnet to match , and the neat little bouquet in the world , for which the major have ransack . behind her come bonny , a very vision of loveliness in her fairy-like lace and beautiful ivory satin . her dark lash droop over her violet eye and a slight flush ting her cheek , but she glide steadily into her place and do her share in the response when the earnest little clergyman appear upon the scene . there be too , with the bright of smile and snowy of waistcoat , give away the bride in the most open-handed fashion . his wife too be by his side in tear and purple velvet , and many other friend and relation , include the two , who come at the major 's invitation , and beam on every one out of a side pew . then there be the signing of the register , and such a kissing and a weeping and a distributing of fee as never be see in church before . and , as one of the witness , would insist upon write her name in the space reserve for the bride , on which there be many small joke pass and much laughter . then the wheezy old organ strike up 's wedding march , and the major puff out his chest and stump down the aisle with his bride , while follow with his , look round with proud and happy eye . the carriage roll up , there be a slam of door and a cracking of whip , and two more couple have start hand in hand down the long road of life which shall say whither ! the breakfast be at , and a very glorious breakfast it be . those who be present still talk of the manner in which the health of the bride be propose by and of the enthusiasm with which the toast be receive by the company . also of the flowery address in which the major return thank for the say toast , and the manly demeanour of the young man as he follow suit . they speak too of many other pleasant thing say and do upon that occasion . how propose the health of the little incumbent , and the little incumbent that of , and the doctor drink to the unpronounceable , who , be unable to reply , sing a revolutionary song which no one could understand . very happy and very hearty be every one by the time that the hour come at which the carriage be order , when , amid a patter of rice and a chorus of heartfelt good wish , the happy couple drive off upon their travel . the liability of the firm of prove to be less serious than be at first imagine . after the catastrophe which have befall the founder of the business , there be almost a panic in , but on examination it prove that though the book have be deliberately falsify for some time , yet trade have be so brisk of late that , with a little help , the firm could continue to exist . throw all his money and his energy into the matter , and take into partnership , which prove to be an excellent thing for both of them . the firm of and be now among the most successful and popular of all the english firm connect with the african trade . of their captain there be none upon whom they place great reliance than upon , whose boat be providentially save from the danger which destroy his former captain and his employer . what become of be never know . some year after hear from a commercial traveller of a melancholy , break man who haunt the low of , and who meet his death eventually in some drunken fracas . there be much about this desperado which tally with the description of young , but nothing certain be ever know about the matter . and now i must bid adieu to the shadowy company with whom i have walk so long . i see them go on down the vista of the future , gather wisdom and happiness as they go . there be the major , as and pigeon-breasted as ever , break from many of his bohemian way , but still full of anecdote and of kindliness . there be his henchman , , too , who be a constant diner at his hospitable board , and who convey so many sweet to a young who have make his appearance , that one might suspect him of receive a commission from the family doctor . , as buxom and pleasant as ever , make noble effort at stop these contraband supply , but the wily teuton still manage to smuggle them through in the face of every obstacle . i see and her husband , chasten by their many trouble , and make the road to the grave pleasant to the good old couple who be so proud of their son . all these i watch as they pass away into the dim come time , and i know as i shut the book that , whatever may be in store for us there , they , at least , can never in the eternal justice of thing come to aught but good .