the great bell of be ring . far away through the forest might be hear its musical clangor and swell . on and fisher upon the hear the distant throb rising and fall upon the sultry summer air . it be a common sound in those common as the chatter of the jay and the booming of the bittern . yet the fisher and the peasant raise their head and look question at each other , for the angelus have already go and vesper be still far off . why should the great bell of toll when the shadow be neither short nor long ? all round the the monk be troop in . under the long avenue of gnarled oak and of beech the brother gather to the sound . from the and the , from the or , from the and saltern , even from the distant of and the outlying grange of 's , they have all turn their step homewards . it have be no sudden call . a swift messenger have the night before speed round to the outlying dependency of the , and have leave the summons for every monk to be back in the cloister by the third hour after noontide . so urgent a message have not be issue within the memory of old , who have clean the knocker since the year after the of . a stranger who know nothing either of the or of its immense resource might have gather from the appearance of the brother some conception of the varied duty which they be call upon to perform , and of the busy , life which centre in the old monastery . as they sweep gravely in by two and by three , with head and mutter lip there be few who do not bear upon them some sign of their daily toil . here be two with wrist and sleeve all spot with the ruddy grape juice . there again be a bearded brother with a axe and a bundle of faggot upon his shoulder , while beside him walk another with the shear under his arm and the white wool still cling to his white gown . a long , straggle troop bore spade and mattock while the two rearmost of all stagger along under a huge basket o ' carp , for the morrow be , and there be fifty platter to be fill and as many sturdy trencherman behind them . of all the throng there be scarce one who be not and weary , for be a hard man to himself and to other . meanwhile , in the broad and lofty chamber set apart for occasion of import , the himself be pace impatiently backwards and forwards , with his long white nervous hand clasp in front of him . his thin , feature and sunken , haggard cheek bespoke one who have indeed beat down that inner foe whom every man must face , but have none the less suffer sorely in the contest . in crush his passion he have well-nigh crush himself . yet , frail as be his person there gleam out ever and anon from under his droop brow a flash of fierce energy , which recall to man 's mind that he come of a fight stock , and that even now his , , be one of the most famous of those stern warrior who have plant the of before the gate of . with lip compress and cloud brow , he stride up and down the oaken floor , the very genius and impersonation of asceticism , while the great bell still thunder and clang above his head . at last the uproar die away in three last , measured throb , and ere their echo have cease the strike a small gong which summon a to his presence . " have the brethren come ? " he ask , in the anglo-french dialect use in religious house . " they be here , " the other answer , with his eye cast down and his hand cross upon his chest . " all ? " " two and thirty of the senior and fifteen of the novice , most holy father . brother mark of the be sore smite with a fever and could not come . he say -- " " it boot not what he say . fever or no , he should have come at my call . his spirit must be chasten , as must that of many more in this . you yourself , brother , have twice raise your voice , so it have come to my ear , when the reader in the refectory have be deal with the life of 's most blessed saint . what thou to say ? " the stand meek and silent , with his arm still cross in front of him . " one thousand and as many , say standing with arm outstretch before the shrine of the , may help to remember that the creator have give us two ear and but one mouth , as a token that there be twice the work for the one as for the other . where be the master of the novice ? " " he be without , most holy father . " " send him hither . " the sandalled foot clatter over the wooden floor , and the door creak upon its hinge . in a few moment it open again to admit a short square monk with a heavy , composed face and an authoritative manner . " you have send for me , holy father ? " " yes , brother , i wish that this matter be dispose of with as little scandal as may be , and yet it be needful that the example should be a public one . " the speak in now , as a language which be more fit by its age and solemnity to convey the thought of two high dignitary of the order . " it would , perchance , be good that the novice be not admit , " suggest the master . " this mention of a woman may turn their mind from their pious meditation to worldly and evil thought . " " woman ! woman ! " groan the . " well have the holy term them radix . from downwards , what good have come from any of them ? who bring the plaint ? " " it be brother . " " a holy and devout young man . " " a light and a pattern to every novice . " " let the matter be bring to an issue then accord to our old-time monastic habit . bid the chancellor and the lead in the brother accord to age , together with brother , the accuse , and brother , the accuser . " " and the novice ? " " let them bide in the north alley of the cloister . stay ! bid the send out to them the lector to read unto them from the ' . ' it may save them from foolish and pernicious babble . " the be leave to himself once more , and bend his thin gray face over his illuminate breviary . so he remain while the senior monk file slowly and sedately into the chamber seat themselves upon the long oaken bench which line the wall on either side . at the further end , in two high chair as large as that of the , though hardly as elaborately carve , sit the master of the novice and the chancellor , the latter a broad and portly priest , with dark mirthful eye and a thick outgrowth of crisp black hair all round his tonsured head . between them stand a lean , brother who appear to be ill at ease , shift his foot from side to side and tap his chin nervously with the long parchment roll which he hold in his hand . the , from his point of vantage , look down on the two long line of face , placid and for the most part , with the large bovine eye and unlined feature which tell of their easy , unchanging existence . then he turn his eager fiery gaze upon the monk who face him . " this plaint be thine , as i learn , brother , " say he . " the holy benedict , patron of our house , be present this day and aid us in our finding ! how many count be there ? " " , most holy father , " the brother answer in a low and quaver voice . " have you set them forth accord to rule ? " " they be here set down , most holy father , upon a cantle of . " " let the be hand to the chancellor . bring in brother , and let him hear the plaint which have be urge against him . " at this order a swing open the door , and two other enter lead between them a young novice of the order . he be a man of huge stature , dark-eyed and red-headed , with a peculiar , expression upon his bold , well-marked feature . his cowl be throw back upon his shoulder , and his gown , unfasten at the top , disclose a round , sinewy neck , ruddy and cord like the bark of the fir . thick , muscular arm , cover with a reddish down , protrude from the wide sleeve of his habit , while his white shirt , loop up upon one side , give a glimpse of a huge knotty leg , scar and tear with the scratch of bramble . with a bow to the , which have in it perhaps more pleasantry than reverence , the novice stride across to the carve prie-dieu which have be set apart for him , and stand silent and erect with his hand upon the gold bell which be use in the private orison of the 's own household . his dark eye glance rapidly over the assembly , and finally settle with a grim and menace twinkle upon the face of his accuser . the chancellor rise , and have slowly unroll the , proceed to read it out in a thick and pompous voice , while a subdued rustle and movement among the brother bespeak the interest with which they follow the proceeding . " charge bring upon the second after the feast of the , in the year of our thirteen hundred and , against brother , formerly know as , or of , but now a novice in the holy monastic order of the . read upon the same day at the of in the presence of the most reverend and of the assemble order . " the charge against the say brother be the following , namely , to wit : " , that on the above-mentioned feast of the , small beer have be serve to the novice in the proportion of one quart to each four , the say brother do drain the pot at one draught to the detriment of brother , brother porphyry and brother , who could scarce eat their of salted on account of their exceed dryness . " at this solemn indictment the novice raise his hand and twitch his lip , while even the placid senior brother glance across at each other and cough to cover their amusement . the alone sit gray and immutable , with a draw face and a brood eye . " item , that have be tell by the master of the novice that he should restrict his food for two day to a single three-pound loaf of bran and bean , for the great honor and glorify of , mother of the holy , he be hear by brother and other to say that he wish twenty thousand devil would fly away with the say , mother of the holy , or any other saint who come between a man and his meat . item , that upon brother reprove him for this blasphemous wish , he do hold the say brother face downwards over the or for a space during which the say brother be able to repeat a pater and four for the good fortify of his soul against impending death . " there be a buzz and murmur among the brethren at this grave charge ; but the hold up his long quiver hand . " what then ? " say he . " item , that between nones and vesper on the feast of the less the say brother be observe upon the road , near the spot which be know as 's in converse with a person of the other sex , be a maiden of the name of , the daughter of the 's verderer . item , that after sundry jape and joke the say brother do lift up the say and do take , carry , and convey her across a stream , to the infinite relish of the devil and the exceed detriment of his own soul , which scandalous and wilful fall away be witness by three member of our order . " a dead silence throughout the room , with a rolling of head and upturn of eye , bespeak the pious horror of the community . the draw his gray brow low over his fiercely questioning eye . " who can vouch for this thing ? " he ask . " that can i , " answer the accuser . " so too can brother , who be with me , and brother mark of the , who have be so much stir and inwardly troubled by the sight that he now lie in a fever through it . " " and the woman ? " ask the . " do she not break into lamentation and woe that a brother should so demean himself ? " " nay , she smile sweetly upon him and thank him . i can vouch it and so can brother porphyry . " " thou ? " cry the , in a high , tempestuous tone . " thou so ? forget that the rule of the order be that in the presence of a woman the face should be ever avert and the eye cast down ? forget it , i say ? if your eye be upon your sandal , how come to see this smile of which prate ? a week in your cell , false brethren , a week of rye-bread and lentil , with double laud and double matins , may help to remembrance of the law under which live . " at this sudden of wrath the two witness sink their face on to their chest , and sit as man crush . the turn his angry eye away from them and bend them upon the accused , who meet his search gaze with a firm and compose face . " what thou to say , brother , upon these weighty thing which be urge against you ? " " little enough , good father , little enough , " say the novice , speak english with a broad west saxon drawl . the brother , who be english to a man , prick up their ear at the sound of the homely and yet unfamiliar speech ; but the flush red with anger , and strike his hand upon the oaken arm of his chair . " what talk be this ? " he cry . " be this a tongue to be use within the wall of an old and monastery ? but grace and learning have ever go hand in hand , and when one be lose it be needless to look for the other . " " i know not about that , " say brother . " i know only that the word come kindly to my mouth , for it be the speech of my father before me . under your favor , i shall either use it now or hold my peace . " the pat his foot and nod his head , as one who pass a point but do not forget it . " for the matter of the ale , " continue brother , " i have come in hot from the field and have scarce get the taste of the thing before mine eye light upon the bottom of the pot . it may be , too , that i speak somewhat shortly concern the bran and the bean , the same be poor provender and unfit for a man of my inch . it be true also that i do lay my hand upon this of a brother , though , as you can see , i do him little scathe . as regard the maid , too , it be true that i do heft her over the stream , she have on her hosen and shoon , whilst i have but my wooden sandal , which could take no hurt from the water . i should have think shame upon my manhood , as well as my monkhood , if i have hold back my hand from her . " he glance around as he speak with the look which he have wear during the whole proceeding . " there be no need to go further , " say the . " he have confess to all . it only remain for me to portion out the punishment which be due to his evil conduct . " he rise , and the two long line of brother follow his example , look sideways with scared face at the angry prelate . " of , " he thunder , " you have show yourself during the two month of your novitiate to be a recreant monk , and one who be unworthy to wear the white garb which be the outer symbol of the spotless spirit . that dress shall therefore be strip from , and thou shalt be cast into the outer world without benefit of clerkship , and without lot or part in the grace and blessing of those who dwell under the care of the . thou shalt come back neither to nor to any of the grange of , and name shall be strike off the scroll of the order . " the sentence appear a terrible one to the old monk , who have become so use to the safe and regular life of the that they would have be as helpless as child in the outer world . from their pious oasis they look dreamily out at the desert of life , a place full of and , restless , and overshadow by evil . the young novice , however , appear to have other thought , for his eye sparkle and his smile broaden . it need but that to add fresh fuel to the fiery mood of the prelate . " so much for spiritual punishment , " he cry . " but it be to gross feeling that we must turn in such nature as thine , and as thou art no longer under the shield of holy church there be the less difficulty . there ! , , him and bind his arm ! drag him forth , and let the forester and the porter scourge him from the precinct ! " as these three brother advanced towards him to carry out the 's direction , the smile fade from the novice 's face , and he glance right and leave with his fierce brown eye , like a bull at a bait . then , with a sudden shout , he tear up the heavy oaken prie-dieu and poise it to strike , take two step backward the while , that none might take him at a vantage . " by the black rood of ! " he roar , " if any knave among you lay a upon the edge of my gown , i will crush his skull like a filbert ! " with his thick knotted arm , his thundering voice , and his bristle of red hair , there be something so repellent in the man that the three brother fly back at the very glare of him ; and the two row of white monk strain away from him like poplar in a tempest . the only spring forward with shine eye ; but the chancellor and the master hang upon either arm and wrest him back out of danger 's way . " he be possess of a devil ! " they shout . " run , brother , brother ! of the , and , and with his arbalest and bolt . tell them that we be in fear of our life ! run , run ! for the love of the ! " but the novice be a strategist as well as a man of action . spring forward , he hurl his unwieldy weapon at brother , and , as desk and monk clatter on to the floor together , he spring through the open door and down the wind stair . sleepy old brother , at the porter 's cell , have a fleeting vision of twinkle foot and fly skirt ; but before he have time to rub his eye the recreant have pass the lodge , and be speed as fast as his sandal could patter along the . have the peaceful atmosphere of the old house be so rudely ruffle . have there be insurrection so sudden , so short , and so successful . yet the be a man of too firm a grain to allow one bold outbreak to imperil the settle order of his great household . in a few hot and bitter word , he compare their false brother 's exit to the expulsion of our first parent from the garden , and more than hint that unless a reformation occur some other of the community might find themselves in the same evil and perilous case . have thus point the moral and reduce his flock to a fitting state of docility , he dismiss them once more to their labor and withdraw himself to his own private chamber , there to seek spiritual aid in the discharge of the duty of his high office . the be still on his knee , when a gentle tap at the door of his cell break in upon his orison . rise in no very good humor at the interruption , he give the word to enter ; but his look of impatience soften down into a pleasant and paternal smile as his eye fall upon his visitor . he be a , youth , rather above the middle size , comely and well , with straight , lithe figure and eager , boyish feature . his clear , pensive gray eye , and quick , delicate expression , speak of a nature which have unfold far from the boisterous joy and sorrow of the world . yet there be a set of the mouth and a prominence of the chin which relieve him of any trace of effeminacy . impulsive he might be , enthusiastic , sensitive , with something sympathetic and adaptive in his disposition ; but an observer of nature 's token would have confidently pledge himself that there be native firmness and strength underlie his gentle , way . the youth be not clad in monastic garb , but in lay attire , though his jerkin , cloak and hose be all of a sombre hue , as befit one who dwell in sacred precinct . a broad leather strap hang from his shoulder support a scrip or satchel such as traveller be wont to carry . in one hand he grasp a thick staff point and shoe with metal , while in the other he hold his coif or bonnet , which bear in its front a broad pewter medal stamp with the image of our of . " art ready , then , fair son ? " say the . " this be indeed a day of coming and of going . it be strange that in one twelve hour the should have cast off its foul weed and should now lose what we be fain to look upon as our choicest blossom . " " you speak too kindly , father , " the youth answer . " if i have my will i should never go forth , but should end my day here in . it have be my home as far back as my mind can carry me , and it be a sore thing for me to have to leave it . " " life bring many a cross , " say the gently . " who be without them ? your go forth be a grief to us as well as to yourself . but there be no help . i have give my foreword and sacred promise to your father , the , that at the age of twenty you should be send out into the world to see for yourself how you like the savor of it . upon the settle , , for you may need rest ere long . " the youth sit down as direct , but reluctantly and with diffidence . the stand by the narrow window , and his long black shadow fall slantwise across the floor . " twenty year ago , " he say , " your father , the of , die , leave to the three hide of rich land in the hundred of , and leave to us also his infant son on condition that we should rear him until he come to man 's estate . this he do partly because your mother be dead , and partly because your elder brother , now of , have already give sign of that fierce and rude nature which would make him no fit companion for you . it be his desire and request , however , that you should not remain in the cloister , but should at a ripe age return into the world . " " but , father , " interrupt the young man , " it be surely true that i be already advanced several degree in clerkship ? " " yes , fair son , but not so far as to bar you from the garb you now wear or the life which you must now lead . you have be porter ? " " yes , father . " " exorcist ? " " yes , father . " " reader ? " " yes , father . " " acolyte ? " " yes , father . " " but have swear no vow of constancy or chastity ? " " no , father . " " then you be free to follow a worldly life . but let me hear , ere you start , what gift you take away with you from ? some i already know . there be the playing of the citole and the rebeck . our choir will be dumb without you . you carve too ? " the youth 's pale face flush with the pride of the skilled workman . " yes , holy father , " he answer . " thank to good brother , i carve in wood and in ivory , and can do something also in silver and in bronze . from brother i have learn to paint on vellum , on glass , and on metal , with a knowledge of those pigment and essence which can preserve the color against damp or a biting air . brother have give me some skill in damask work , and in the enamel of shrine , tabernacle , and . for the rest , i know a little of the making of cover , the cutting of precious stone , and the fashion of instrument . " " a goodly list , truly , " cry the superior with a smile . " what clerk of or of could say as much ? but of not so much to show there , i fear ? " " no , father , it have be slight enough . yet , thank to our good chancellor , i be not wholly unlettered . i have read , , and other of the schoolman , together with the learn and the book of the holy . " " but of the thing of this world , what have you gather from your reading ? from this high window you may catch a glimpse over the wooden point and the smoke of of the mouth of the , and the shine sea . now , i pray you , , if a man be to take a ship and spread sail across yonder water , where might he hope to arrive ? " the youth ponder , and draw a plan amongst the rush with the point of his staff . " holy father , " say he , " he would come upon those part of which be hold by the 's . but if he trend to the south he might reach and the . to his north would be and the country of the and of the muscovite . " " true . and how if , after reach the 's possession , he still journey on to the eastward ? " " he would then come upon that part of which be still in dispute , and he might hope to reach the famous city of , where dwell our blessed father , the prop of . " " and then ? " " then he would pass through the land of the and the great , and so to the country of the hun and of the lithuanian pagan , beyond which lie the great city of and the kingdom of the unclean follower of . " " and beyond that , fair son ? " " beyond that be and the , and the great river which have its source in the of . " " and then ? " " , good father , i can tell . methinks the end of the world be not far from there . " " then we can still find something to teach , , " say the complaisantly . " know that many strange nation lie betwixt there and the end of the world . there be the country of the amazon , and the country of the dwarf , and the country of the fair but evil woman who slay with behold , like the basilisk . beyond that again be the kingdom of and of the great . these thing i know for very sooth , for i have them from that pious christian and valiant knight , , who stop twice at on his way to and from , and discourse to us concern what he have see from the reader 's desk in the refectory , until there be many a good brother who get neither bit nor sup , so strike be they by his strange tale . " " i would fain know , father , " ask the young man , " what there may be at the end of the world ? " " there be some thing , " reply the gravely , " into which it be never intend that we should inquire . but you have a long road before you . whither will you first turn ? " " to my brother be at . if he be indeed an ungodly and violent man , there be the more need that i should seek him out and see whether i can turn him to good way . " the shake his head . " the of have earn an evil name over the country side , " he say . " if you must go to him , see at least that he do not turn you from the narrow path upon which you have learn to tread . but you be in be keep , and should you ever look in danger and in trouble . above all , shun the snare of woman , for they be ever set for the foolish foot of the young . kneel down , my child , and take an old man 's blessing . " bend his head while the pour out his heartfelt supplication that would watch over this young soul , now go forth into the darkness and danger of the world . it be no mere form for either of them . to them the outside life of mankind do indeed seem to be one of violence and of sin , beset with physical and still more with spiritual danger . heaven , too , be very near to them in those day . 's direct agency be to be see in the thunder and the rainbow , the whirlwind and the lightning . to the believer , cloud of angel and confessor , and martyr , army of the sainted and the save , be ever stoop over their struggle brethren upon earth , raise , encourage , and support them . it be then with a light heart and a stout courage that the young man turn from the 's room , while the latter , follow him to the , finally commend him to the protection of the holy , patron of traveller . underneath , in the porch of the , the monk have gather to give him a last . many have bring some parting token by which he should remember them . there be brother with a crucifix of rare carve ivory , and brother with a psalter adorn with golden bee , and brother with the " slaying of the " most daintily set forth upon vellum . all these be duly pack away deep in the traveller 's scrip , and above them old brother have place a parcel of bread and cheese , with a small flask of the famous wine . so , amid and and blessing , turn his back upon . at the turn of the road he stop and gaze back . there be the building which he know so well , the 's house , the long church , the cloister with their line of arch , all bath and mellow in the evening sun . there too be the broad sweep of the river , the old stone well , the canopy niche of the , and in the centre of all the cluster of figure who wave their hand to him . a sudden mist swim up before the young man 's eye , and he turn away upon his journey with a heavy heart and a choke throat . it be not , however , in the nature of thing that a lad of twenty , with young life glow in his vein and all the wide world before him , should spend his first hour of freedom in mourn for what he have leave . long ere be out of sound of the bell he be stride sturdily along , swing his staff and whistle as merrily as the bird in the thicket . it be an evening to raise a man 's heart . the sun shine slantwise through the tree throw delicate tracery across the road , with bar of golden light between . away in the distance before and behind , the green bough , now turn in place to a redness , shoot their broad arch across the track . the still summer air be heavy with the resinous smell of the great forest . here and there a tawny brook prattle out from among the underwood and lose itself again in the fern and bramble upon the further side . save the dull piping of insect and the sough of the leave , there be silence sweet restful silence of nature . and yet there be no want of whole wide wood be full of it . now it be a lithe , furtive stoat which shoot across the path upon some fell errand of its own ; then it be a wild cat which squat upon the outlying branch of an oak and peep at the traveller with a yellow and dubious eye . once it be a wild sow which scuttle out of the bracken , with two young sounder at her heel , and once a lordly red staggard walk daintily out from among the tree trunk , and look around him with the fearless gaze of one who live under the 's own high protection . give his staff a merry flourish , however , and the red deer bethink him that the be far off , so streak away from whence he come . the youth have now journey considerably beyond the furthest domain of the . he be the more surprised therefore when , on come round a turn in the path , he perceive a man clad in the familiar garb of the order , and seat in a clump of heather by the roadside . have know every brother well , but this be a face which be new to face which be very red and puff , work this way and that , as though the man be sore perplex in his mind . once he shake both hand furiously in the air , and twice he spring from his seat and hurry down the road . when he rise , however , observe that his robe be much too long and loose for him in every direction , trail upon the ground and bagging about his ankle , so that even with skirt he could make little progress . he run once , but the long gown clog him so that he slow down into a shamble walk , and finally plump into the heather once more . " young friend , " say he , when be abreast of him , " i fear from garb that thou know little of the of . " " then you be in error , friend , " the clerk answer , " for i have spend all my day within its wall . " " so indeed ? " cry he . " then perhaps tell me the name of a great loathly lump of a brother ' freckled face an ' a hand like a spade . his eye be black an ' his hair be red an ' his voice like the parish bull . i trow that there can be two alike in the same cloister . " " that surely can be no other than brother , " say . " i trust he have do you no wrong , that you should be so hot against him . " " wrong , ? " cry the other , jump out of the heather . " wrong ! why he have steal every of clothing off my back , if that be a wrong , and have leave me here in this sorry frock of white , so that i have shame to go back to my wife , lest she think that i have don her old kirtle . and alas that ever i should have meet him ! " " but how come this ? " ask the young clerk , who could scarce keep from laughter at the sight of the hot little man so swathe in the great white cloak . " it come in this way , " he say , sit down once more : " i be pass this way , hope to reach ere nightfall when i come on this red-headed knave seat even where we be sit now . i uncover and lout as i pass think that he might be a holy man at his orison , but he call to me and ask me if i have hear speak of the new indulgence in favor of the . ' not i , ' i answer . ' then the bad for soul ! ' say he ; and with that he break into a long tale how that on account of the virtue of the it have be decree by the pope that whoever should wear the habit of a monk of for as long as he might say the seven psalm of should be assure of the kingdom of . when i hear this i pray him on my knee that he would give me the use of his gown , which after many contention he at last agree to do , on my pay him three mark towards the of the image of the martyr . have strip his robe , i have no choice but to let him have the wear of my good leathern jerkin and hose , for , as he say , it be chill to the blood and unseemly to the eye to stand whilst i make my orison . he have scarce got them on , and it be a sore labor , see that my inch will scarce match my have scarce got them on , i say , and i not yet at the end of the second psalm , when he bid me do honor to my new dress , and with that set off down the road as fast as foot would carry him . for myself , i could no more run than if i have be sow in a sack ; so here i sit , and here i be like to sit , before i set eye upon my clothes again . " " , friend , take it not so sadly , " say , clap the disconsolate one upon the shoulder . " change robe for a jerkin once more at the , unless perchance you have a friend near at hand . " " that have i , " he answer , " and close ; but i care not to go nigh him in this plight , for his wife have a gibe tongue , and will spread the tale until i could not show my face in any market from to . but if you , fair sir , out of your kind charity would be please to go a matter of two out of your way , you would do me such a service as i could scarce repay . " " with all my heart , " say readily . " then take this pathway on the left , i pray , and then the which pass on the right . you will then see under a great the hut of a charcoal-burner . give him my name , good sir , the name of the fuller , of , and ask him for a change of raiment , that i may pursue my journey without delay . there be reason why he would be loth to refuse me . " start off along the path indicate , and soon find the where the burner dwell . he be away in the forest , but his wife , a ruddy bustle dame , find the needful garment and tie them into a bundle . while she busy herself in find and fold them , stand by the open door look in at her with much interest and some distrust , for he have never be so nigh to a woman before . she have round red arm , a dress of some sober woollen stuff , and a brass brooch the size of a cheese-cake stick in the front of it . " the fuller ! " she keep repeat . " marry come up ! if i be the fuller 's wife i would teach him good than to give his clothes to the first knave who ask for them . but he be always a poor , fond , silly creature , be , though we be beholden to him for help to bury our second son , who be a ' prentice to him at in the year of the . but who be you , young sir ? " " i be a clerk on my road from to . " " , indeed ! be bring up at the then . i could read it from redden cheek and downcast eye . learn from the monk , i trow , to fear a woman as thou wouldst a . out upon them ! that they should dishonor their own mother by such teaching . a pretty world it would be with all the woman out of it . " " heaven forfend that such a thing should come to pass ! " say . " amen and amen ! but thou art a pretty lad , and the pretty for modest way . it be easy to see from cheek that thou not spend day in the rain and the heat and the wind , as my poor have be force to do . " " i have indeed see little of life , good dame . " " wilt find nothing in it to pay for the loss of own freshness . here be the clothes , and can leave them when next he come this way . ! see the dust upon doublet ! it be easy to see that there be no woman to tend to . so ! -- be good . now buss me , boy . " stoop and kiss her , for the kiss be the common salutation of the age , and , as long afterwards remark , more use in than in any other country . yet it send the blood to his temple again , and he wonder , as he turn away , what the would have answer to so frank an invitation . he be still tingle from this new experience when he come out upon the and see a sight which drive all other thought from his mind . some way down from where he have leave him the unfortunate be stamp and rave tenfold bad than before . now , however , instead of the great white cloak , he have no clothes on at all , save a short woollen shirt and a pair of leather shoe . far down the road a long-legged figure be run , with a bundle under one arm and the other hand to his side , like a man who laugh until he be sore . " see him ! " yell . " look to him ! you shall be my witness . he shall see jail for this . see where he go with my cloak under his arm ! " " who then ? " cry . " who but that cursed brother . he have not leave me clothe enough to make a . the double thief have cozen me out of my gown . " " stay though , my friend , it be his gown , " object . " it boot not . he have them , jerkin , hosen and all . to him that he leave me the shirt and the shoon . i doubt not that he will be back for them anon . " " but how come this ? " ask , open-eyed with astonishment . " be those the clothes ? for dear charity 's sake give them to me . not the himself shall have these from me , though he send the whole college of cardinal to ask it . how come it ? why , you have scarce go ere this loathly come run back again , and , when i ope mouth to reproach him , he ask me whether it be indeed likely that a man of prayer would leave his own godly raiment in order to take a layman 's jerkin . he have , he say , but go for a while that i might be the free for my devotion . on this i pluck off the gown , and he with much show of haste do begin to undo his point ; but when i throw his frock down he clip it up and run off all untruss , leave me in this sorry plight . he laugh so the while , like a great croak frog , that i might have catch him have my breath not be as short as his leg be long . " the young man listen to this tale of wrong with all the seriousness that he could maintain ; but at the sight of the pursy red-faced man and the dignity with which he bear him , the laughter come so thick upon him that he have to lean up against a tree-trunk . the fuller look sadly and gravely at him ; but find that he still laugh , he bow with much mock politeness and stalk onwards in his borrowed clothes . watch him until he be small in the distance , and then , wipe the tear from his eye , he set off briskly once more upon his journey . the road along which he travel be scarce as populous as most other road in the kingdom , and far less so than those which lie between the large town . yet from time to time meet other wayfarer , and more than once be overtake by string of pack mule and horseman journey in the same direction as himself . once a beg friar come limp along in a brown habit , implore in a most dolorous voice to give him a single groat to buy bread wherewith to save himself from impending death . pass him swiftly by , for he have learn from the monk to have no love for the wander friar , and , besides , there be a great mutton bone stick out of his pouch to prove him a liar . swiftly as he go , however , he could not escape the curse of the four blessed evangelist which the mendicant howl behind him . so dreadful be his execration that the frightened lad thrust his finger into his , and run until the fellow be but a brown smirch upon the yellow road . further on , at the edge of the woodland , he come upon a chapman and his wife , who sit upon a fall tree . he have put his pack down as a table , and the two of them be devour a great pasty , and wash it down with some drink from a stone jar . the chapman break a rough jest as he pass , and the woman call shrilly to to come and join them , on which the man , turn suddenly from mirth to wrath , begin to belabor her with his cudgel . hasten on , lest he make more mischief , and his heart be heavy as lead within him . look where he would , he seem to see nothing but injustice and violence and the hardness of man to man . but even as he brood sadly over it and pine for the sweet peace of the , he come on an open space dot with holly bush , where be the strange sight that he have yet chance upon . near to the pathway lie a long clump of greenery , and from behind this there stick straight up into the air four human leg clad in hosen , yellow and black . strange of all be when a brisk tune strike suddenly up and the four leg begin to kick and twitter in time to the music . walk on tiptoe round the bush , he stand in amazement to see two man bound about on their head , while they play , the one a viol and the other a pipe , as merrily and as truly as though they be seat in a choir . cross himself as he gaze at this unnatural sight , and could scarce hold his ground with a steady face , when the two dancer , catch sight of him , come bounce in his direction . a spear 's length from him , they each throw a somersault into the air , and come down upon their foot with smirk face and their hand over their heart . " a guerdon , my knight of the stare eye ! " cry one . " a gift , my prince ! " shout the other . " any trifle will purse of gold , or even a jewel goblet . " think of what he have read of demoniac , the , the wild talk . it be in his mind to repeat over the exorcism proper to such attack ; but the two burst out at his scared face , and turn on to their head once more , clap their heel in derision . " never see tumbler before ? " ask the elder , a , swarthy man , as brown and supple as a hazel twig . " why shrink from us , then , as though we be the spawn of the one ? " " why shrink , my ? why so afeard , my sweet cinnamon ? " exclaim the other , a loose-jointed lanky youth with a dancing , roguish eye . " truly , sir , it be a new sight to me , " the clerk answer . " when i see your four leg above the bush i could scarce credit my own eye . why be it that you do this thing ? " " a dry question to answer , " cry the young , come back on to his foot . " a most husky question , my fair bird ! but how ? a flask , a flask ! -- all that be wonderful ! " he shoot out his hand as he speak , and pluck 's bottle out of his scrip , he deftly knock the neck off , and pour the half of it down his throat . the rest he hand to his comrade , who drink the wine , and then , to the clerk 's increase amazement , make a show of swallow the bottle , with such skill that seem to see it vanish down his throat . a moment later , however , he fling it over his head , and catch it bottom downwards upon the calf of his left leg . " we thank you for the wine , kind sir , " say he , " and for the ready courtesy wherewith you offer it . touch your question , we may tell you that we be stroller and juggler , who , have perform with much applause at fair , be now on our way to the great michaelmas market at . as our art be a very fine and delicate one , however , we can let a day go by without exercise ourselves in it , to which end we choose some quiet and sheltered spot where we may break our journey . here you find us ; and we can wonder that you , who be new to tumble , should be astound , since many great baron , earl , marshal and knight , who have wander as far as the , be of one mind in say that they have never see a more noble or gracious performance . if you will be please to sit upon that stump , we will now continue our exercise . " sit down willingly as direct with two great bundle on either side of him which contain the stroller ' of silk and girdle of leather , spangle with brass and tin . the juggler be on their head once more , bound about with rigid neck , play the while in perfect time and tune . it chance that out of one of the bundle there stick the end of what the clerk see to be a cittern , so draw it forth , he tune it up and twang a harmony to the merry lilt which the dancer play . on that they drop their own instrument , and put their hand to the ground they hop about faster and faster , ever shout to him to play more briskly , until at last for very weariness all three have to stop . " well play , sweet poppet ! " cry the young . " a rare touch on the string . " " how know you the tune ? " ask the other . " i know it not . i do but follow the note i hear . " both open their eye at this , and stare at with as much amazement as he have show at them . " you have a fine trick of ear then , " say one . " we have long wish to meet such a man . wilt join us and jog on to ? duty shall be light , and thou shalt have a day and meat for supper every night . " " with as much beer as you can put away , " say the other , " and a flask of gascon wine on sabbath . " " nay , it may not be . i have other work to do . i have tarry with you over long , " quoth , and resolutely set forth upon his journey once more . they run behind him some little way , offer him first fourpence and then sixpence a day , but he only smile and shake his head , until at last they fall away from him . look back , he see that the small have mount on the young 's shoulder , and that they stand so , some ten foot high , wave their adieu to him . he wave back to them , and then hasten on , the lighter of heart for have fall in with these strange man of pleasure . have go no great distance for all the many small passage that have befall him . yet to him , use as he be to a life of such quiet that the failure of a brewing or the alter of an anthem have seem to be of the deep import , the quick change play of the light and shadow of life be strangely startling and interesting . a gulf seem to divide this brisk uncertain existence from the old steady round of work and of prayer which he have leave behind him . the few hour that have pass since he see the tower stretch out in his memory until they outgrow whole month of the stagnant life of the cloister . as he walk and munch the soft bread from his scrip , it seem strange to him to feel that it be still warm from the oven of . when he pass , where be three cottage and a barn , he reach the edge of the tree country , and find the great barren heath of stretch in front of him , all pink with heather and bronze with the fading fern . on the left the wood be still thick , but the road edge away from them and wound over the open . the sun lie low in the west upon a purple cloud , whence it throw a mild , chasten light over the wild moorland and glitter on the fringe of forest turn the wither leave into flake of dead gold , the bright for the black depth behind them . to the see eye decay be as fair as growth , and death as life . the thought steal into 's heart as he look upon the autumnal country side and marvel at its beauty . he have little time to dwell upon it however , for there be still six good mile between him and the near inn . he sit down by the roadside to partake of his bread and cheese , and then with a light scrip he hasten upon his way . there appear to be more wayfarer on the down than in the forest . first he pass two dominican in their long black dress , who sweep by him with downcast look and patter lip , without so much as a glance at him . then there come a gray friar , or , with a good paunch upon him , walk slowly and look about him with the air of a man who be at peace with himself and with all man . he stop to ask him whether it be not true that there be a hostel somewhere in those part which be especially famous for the stew of eel . the clerk have make answer that he have hear the eel of well speak of , the friar suck in his lip and hurry forward . close at his heel come three laborer walk abreast , with spade and mattock over their shoulder . they sing some rude chorus right tunefully as they walk , but their english be so coarse and rough that to the ear of a man it sound like a foreign and barbarous tongue . one of them carry a young bittern which they have catch upon the moor , and they offer it to for a silver groat . very glad he be to get safely past them , for , with their bristle red beard and their fierce blue eye , they be uneasy man to bargain with upon a lonely moor . yet it be not always the burly and the wild who be the most to be dread . the worker look hungrily at him , and then jog onwards upon their way in slow , lumbering saxon style . a bad man to deal with be a cripple who come hobble down the path , so weak and so old to all appearance that a child need not stand in fear of him . yet when have pass him , of a sudden , out of pure devilment , he scream out a curse at him , and send a jagged flint stone hurtle past his ear . so horrid be the causeless rage of the crooked creature , that the clerk come over a cold thrill , and take to his heel until he be out of shot from stone or word . it seem to him that in this country of there be no protection for a man save that which lie in the strength of his own arm and the speed of his own foot . in the cloister he have hear vague talk of the mighty law which be high than prelate or baron , yet no sign could he see of it . what be the benefit of a law write fair upon parchment , he wonder , if there be no officer to enforce it . as it fall out , however , he have that very evening , ere the sun have set , a chance of see how stern be the grip of the english law when it do happen to seize the offender . a mile or so out upon the moor the road take a very sudden dip into a hollow , with a stream run swiftly down the centre of it . to the right of this stand , and stand to this day , an ancient barrow , or bury mound , cover deeply in a bristle of heather and bracken . be plod down the slope upon one side , when he see an old dame come towards him upon the other , limp with weariness and lean heavily upon a stick . when she reach the edge of the stream she stand helpless , look to right and to leave for some ford . where the path run down a great stone have be fix in the centre of the brook , but it be too far from the bank for her aged and uncertain foot . twice she thrust forward at it , and twice she draw back , until at last , give up in despair , she sit herself down by the brink and wring her hand wearily . there she still sit when reach the crossing . " come , mother , " quoth he , " it be not so very perilous a passage . " " alas ! good youth , " she answer , " i have a humor in the eye , and though i can see that there be a stone there i can by no mean be sure as to where it lie . " " that be easily amend , " say he cheerily , and pick her lightly up , for she be much wear with time , he pass across with her . he could not but observe , however , that as he place her down her knee seem to fail her , and she could scarcely prop herself up with her staff . " you be weak , mother , " say he . " journey far , i wit . " " from , friend , " say she , in a quaver voice ; " three day have i be on the road . i go to my son , who be one of the 's at . he have ever say that he would care for me in mine old age . " " and rightly too , mother , since you care for him in his youth . but when have you break fast ? " " at ; but alas ! my money be at an end , and i could but get a dish of from the nunnery . yet i trust that i may be able to reach , where i may have all that heart can desire ; for oh ! sir , but my son be a fine man , with a kindly heart of his own , and it be as good as food to me to think that he should have a doublet of green to his back and be the 's own pay man . " " it be a long road yet to , " say ; " but here be such bread and cheese as i have leave , and here , too , be a penny which may help you to supper . be with you ! " " be with you , young man ! " she cry . " may he make your heart as glad as you have make mine ! " she turn away , still mumble blessing , and see her short figure and her long shadow stumble slowly up the slope . he be move away himself , when his eye light upon a strange sight , and one which send a tingle through his skin . out of the tangled scrub on the old overgrow barrow two human face be look out at him ; the sinking sun glimmer full upon them , show up every line and feature . the one be an oldish man with a thin beard , a crooked nose , and a broad red smudge from a over his temple ; the other be a negro , a thing rarely meet in at that day , and rare still in the quiet part . have read of such folk , but have never see one before , and could scarce take his eye from the fellow 's broad pout lip and shine tooth . even as he gaze , however , the two come writhe out from among the heather , and come down towards him with such a guilty , slink carriage , that the clerk feel that there be no good in them , and hasten onwards upon his way . he have not gain the crown of the slope , when he hear a sudden scuffle behind him and a feeble voice bleat for help . look round , there be the old dame down upon the roadway , with her red fly on the breeze , while the two rogue , black and white , stoop over her , wrest away from her the penny and such other poor trifle as be worth the taking . at the sight of her thin limb struggle in weak resistance , such a glow of fierce anger pass over as set his head in a whirl . drop his scrip , he bound over the stream once more , and make for the two villain , with his staff whirl over his shoulder and his gray eye blaze with fury . the robber , however , be not dispose to leave their victim until they have work their wicked will upon her . the black man , with the woman 's crimson scarf tie round his swarthy head , stand forward in the centre of the path , with a long knife in his hand , while the other , wave a ragged cudgel , curse at and dare him to come on . his blood be fairly aflame , however , and he need no such challenge . dash at the black man , he smite at him with such good will that the other let his knife tinkle into the roadway , and hop howl to a safe distance . the second rogue , however , make of stern stuff , rush in upon the clerk , and clip him round the waist with a grip like a bear , shout the while to his comrade to come round and stab him in the back . at this the negro take heart of grace , and pick up his dagger again he come steal with prowl step and murderous eye , while the two sway backwards and forwards , stagger this way and that . in the very midst of the scuffle , however , whilst brace himself to feel the cold blade between his shoulder , there come a sudden scurry of hoof , and the black man yell with terror and run for his life through the heather . the man with the , too , struggle to break away , and hear his tooth chatter and feel his limb grow limp to his hand . at this sign of come aid the clerk hold on the tight , and at last be able to pin his man down and glance behind him to see where all the noise be come from . down the slanting road there be ride a big , burly man , clad in a tunic of purple velvet and drive a great black horse as hard as it could gallop . he lean well over its neck as he ride , and make a heave with his shoulder at every bind as though he be lift the steed instead of it carry him . in the rapid glance see that he have white doeskin glove , a curl white feather in his flat velvet cap , and a broad gold , embroider baldric across his bosom . behind him ride six other , two and two , clad in sober brown jerkin , with the long yellow stave of their bow thrust out from behind their right shoulder . down the hill they thunder , over the brook and up to the scene of the contest . " here be one ! " say the leader , spring down from his reek horse , and seize the white rogue by the edge of his jerkin . " this be one of them . i know him by that devil 's touch upon his brow . where be your cord , ? so ! bind him hand and foot . his last hour have come . and you , young man , who may you be ? " " i be a clerk , sir , travel from . " " a clerk ! " cry the other . " art from or from ? thou a letter from the chancellor of college give a permit to beg ? let me see letter . " he have a stern , square face , with bushy side whisker and a very questioning eye . " i be from , and i have no need to beg , " say , who be all of a tremble now that the ruffle be over . " the good for , " the other answer . " know who i be ? " " no , sir , i do not . " " i be the law ! " -- his head solemnly . " i be the law of and the mouthpiece of his most gracious and royal majesty , the . " lout low to the 's representative . " truly you come in good time , honor sir , " say he . " a moment later and they would have slay me . " " but there should be another one , " cry the man in the purple coat . " there should be a black man . a shipman with 's fire , and a black man who have serve him as be the pair that we be in chase of . " " the black man flee over to that side , " say , point towards the barrow . " he could not have go far , sir bailiff , " cry one of the archer , unsling his bow . " he be in hide somewhere , for he know well , black paynim as he be , that our horse ' four leg could outstrip his two . " " then we shall have him , " say the other . " it shall never be say , whilst i be bailiff of , that any waster , , or murtherer come away from me and my posse . leave that rogue lie . now stretch out in line , my merry one , with arrow on string , and i shall show you such sport as only the can give . you on the left , , and of upon the right . so ! beat high and low among the heather , and a pot of wine to the lucky marksman . " as it chance , however , the searcher have not far to seek . the negro have burrow down into his hiding-place upon the barrow , where he might have lie snug enough , have it not be for the red gear upon his head . as he raise himself to look over the bracken at his enemy , the stare color catch the eye of the bailiff , who break into a long screeching whoop and spur forward sword in hand . see himself discover , the man rush out from his hiding-place , and bound at the top of his speed down the line of archer , keep a good hundred pace to the front of them . the two who be on either side of bend their bow as calmly as though they be shoot at the popinjay at the village fair . " seven yard windage , , " say one , whose hair be streak with gray . " five , " reply the other , let loose his string . give a gulp in his throat , for the yellow streak seem to pass through the man ; but he still run forward . " seven , you , " growl the first speaker , and his bow twang like a . the black man spring high up into the air , and shoot out both his arm and his leg , come down all among the heather . " right under the blade bone ! " quoth the archer , saunter forward for his arrow . " the old hound be the good when all be say , " quoth the bailiff of , as they make back for the roadway . " that mean a quart of the good malmsey in this very night , . sure that he be dead ? " " dead as , worshipful sir . " " it be well . now , as to the other knave . there be tree and to spare over yonder , but we have scarce leisure to make for them . draw sword , of , and hew me his head from his shoulder . " " a boon , gracious sir , a boon ! " cry the condemn man . " what then ? " ask the bailiff . " i will confess to my crime . it be indeed i and the black cook , both from the ship ' , ' of , who do set upon the merchant and rob him of his spicery and his , for which , as we well know , you hold a warrant against us . " " there be little merit in this confession , " quoth the bailiff sternly . " thou do evil within my bailiwick , and must die . " " but , sir , " urge , who be white to the lip at these bloody doings , " he have not yet come to trial . " " young clerk , " say the bailiff , " you speak of that of which you know nothing . it be true that he have not come to trial , but the trial have come to him . he have flee the law and be beyond its pale . touch not that which be no concern of thine . but what be this boon , rogue , which you would crave ? " " i have in my shoe , most worshipful sir , a strip of wood which belong once to the bark wherein the bless be dash up against the island of . i buy it for two rise noble from a shipman who come from the . the boon i crave be that you will place it in my hand and let me die still grasp it . in this manner , not only shall my own eternal salvation be secure , but thine also , for i shall never cease to intercede for . " at the command of the bailiff they pluck off the fellow 's shoe , and there sure enough at the side of the instep , wrap in a piece of fine , lie a long , dark splinter of wood . the archer doff cap at the sight of it , and the bailiff cross himself devoutly as he hand it to the robber . " if it should chance , " he say , " that through the surpass merit of the bless your soul should gain a way into paradise , i trust that you will not forget that intercession which you have promise . bear in mind too , that it be the bailiff for whom you pray , and not the sheriff , who be my uncle 's son . now , , i pray you dispatch , for we have a long ride before us and sun have already set . " gaze upon the portly official , the knot of archer with their hand to the bridle of their horse , the thief with his arm truss back and his doublet turn down upon his shoulder . by the side of the track the old dame be stand , fasten her red once more round her head . even as he look one of the archer draw his sword with a sharp whirr of steel and up to the lost man . the clerk hurry away in horror ; but , ere he have go many pace , he hear a sudden , sullen thump , with a choke , whistle sound at the end of it . a minute later the bailiff and four of his man ride past him on their journey back to , the other two have be choose as . as they pass see that one of the man be wipe his upon the mane of his horse . a deadly sickness come over him at the sight , and sit down by the wayside he burst out weep , with his nerve all in a jangle . it be a terrible world think he , and it be hard to know which be the most to be dread , the knave or the man of the law . the night have already fall , and the moon be shine between the rift of ragged , drift cloud , before , footsore and weary from the unwonted exercise , find himself in front of the forest inn which stand upon the outskirt of . the building be long and low , stand back a little from the road , with two flambeau blaze on either side of the door as a welcome to the traveller . from one window there thrust forth a long pole with a bunch of greenery tie to the end of sign that liquor be to be sell within . as walk up to it he perceive that it be rudely fashion out of beam of wood , with twinkle light all over where the glow from within shine through the chink . the roof be poor and thatch ; but in strange contrast to it there run all along under the eaves a line of wooden shield , most gorgeously paint with chevron , bend , and saltire , and every heraldic device . by the door a horse stand tether , the ruddy glow beat strongly upon his brown head and patient eye , while his body stand back in the shadow . stand still in the roadway for a few minute reflect upon what he should do . it be , he know , only a few mile further to , where his brother dwell . on the other hand , he have never see this brother since childhood , and the report which have come to his ear concern him be seldom to his advantage . by all account he be a hard and a bitter man . it might be an evil start to come to his door so late and claim the shelter of his roof . well to sleep here at this inn , and then travel on to in the morning . if his brother would take him in , well and good . he would bide with him for a time and do what he might to serve him . if , on the other hand , he should have harden his heart against him , he could only go on his way and do the good he might by his skill as a craftsman and a scrivener . at the end of a year he would be free to return to the cloister , for such have be his father 's bequest . a monkish upbringing , one year in the world after the age of twenty , and then a free selection one way or the be a strange course which have be mark out for him . such as it be , however , he have no choice but to follow it , and if he be to begin by make a friend of his brother he have well wait until morning before he knock at his dwelling . the rude plank door be ajar , but as approach it there come from within such a gust of rough laughter and clatter of tongue that he stand irresolute upon the threshold . summon courage , however , and reflect that it be a public dwelling , in which he have as much right as any other man , he push it open and step into the common room . though it be an autumn evening and somewhat warm , a huge fire of heap billet of wood crackle and sparkle in a broad , open grate , some of the smoke escape up a rude chimney , but the great part roll out into the room , so that the air be thick with it , and a man come from without could scarce catch his breath . on this fire a great cauldron bubble and simmer , give forth a rich and promising smell . seat round it be a dozen or so folk , of all age and condition , who set up such a shout as enter that he stand peer at them through the smoke , uncertain what this riotous greeting might portend . " a rouse ! a rouse ! " cry one rough look fellow in a tatter jerkin . " one more round of mead or ale and the score to the last comer . " " ' the law of ' , ' " shout another . " there , ! here be fresh custom come to the house , and not a drain for the company . " " i will take your order , gentle ; i will assuredly take your order , " the landlady answer , bustle in with her hand full of leathern . " what be it that you drink , then ? beer for the lad of the forest , mead for the gleeman , strong water for the tinker , and wine for the rest . it be an old custom of the house , young sir . it have be the use at ' ' this many a year back that the company should drink to the health of the last comer . be it your pleasure to humor it ? " " why , good dame , " say , " i would not offend the custom of your house , but it be only sooth when i say that my purse be a thin one . as far as two pence will go , however , i shall be right glad to do my part . " " plainly say and bravely speak , my suckling friar , " roar a deep voice , and a heavy hand fall upon 's shoulder . look up , he see beside him his former cloister companion the renegade monk , . " by the thorn of ! ill day be come upon , " say he . " here they have get rid in one day of the only two man within their i have have mine eye upon , youngster , and i know that for all baby-face there be the making of a man in . then there be the , too . i be no friend of his , nor he of mine ; but he have warm blood in his vein . he be the only man leave among them . the other , what be they ? " " they be holy man , " answer gravely . " holy man ? holy cabbage ! holy ! what do they do but live and suck in sustenance and grow fat ? if that be holiness , i could show you hog in this forest who be fit to head the calendar . think you it be for such a life that this good arm be fix upon my shoulder , or that head place upon your neck ? there be work in the world , man , and it be not by hide behind stone wall that we shall do it . " " why , then , do you join the brother ? " ask . " a fair enough question ; but it be as fairly answer . i join them because , of , marry of , and leave a certain of in the cold , for that he be a rant , rove blade who be not to be trust in wedlock . that be why , be fond and hot-headed , i leave the world ; and that be why , have have time to take thought , i be right glad to find myself back in it once more . ill betide the day that ever i take off my yeoman 's jerkin to put on the white gown ! " whilst he be speak the landlady come in again , bear a broad platter , upon which stand all the beaker and flagon charge to the brim with the brown ale or the ruby wine . behind her come a maid with a high pile of wooden plate , and a great sheaf of spoon , one of which she hand round to each of the traveller . two of the company , who be dress in the green doublet of forester , lift the big pot off the fire , and a third , with a huge pewter ladle , serve out a portion of steam collop to each guest . bear his share and his away with him to a retire trestle in the corner , where he could sup in peace and watch the strange scene , which be so different to those silent and well-ordered meal to which he be accustom . the room be not unlike a stable . the low ceiling , and dingy , be pierce by several square trap-door with rough-hew ladder lead up to them . the wall of bare unpainted plank be stud here and there with great wooden pin , place at irregular interval and height , from which hung , wallet , whip , bridle , and saddle . over the fireplace be suspend six or seven shield of wood , with rudely daub upon them , which show by their vary degree of smokiness and dirt that they have be place there at different period . there be no furniture , save a single long dresser cover with coarse crockery , and a number of wooden bench and trestle , the leg of which sink deeply into the soft clay floor , while the only light , save that of the fire , be furnish by three torch stick in socket on the wall , which flicker and crackle , give forth a strong resinous odor . all this be novel and strange to the youth ; but most interesting of all be the motley circle of guest who sit eat their collop round the blaze . they be a humble group of wayfarer , such as might have be find that night in any inn through the length and breadth of ; but to him they represent that vague world against which he have be so frequently and so earnestly warn . it do not seem to him from what he could see of it to be such a very wicked place after all . three or four of the man round the fire be evidently and verderer from the forest , sunburned and bearded , with the quick restless eye and lithe movement of the deer among which they live . close to the corner of the chimney sit a middle-aged gleeman , clad in a fade garb of cloth , the tunic of which be so outgrow that it do not fasten at the neck and at the waist . his face be swollen and coarse , and his watery protrude eye speak of a life which never wander very far from the . a gilt harp , blotch with many stain and with two of its string missing , be tuck under one of his arm , while with the other he scoop greedily at his platter . next to him sit two other man of about the same age , one with a trimming of fur to his coat , which give him a dignity which be evidently dear to him than his comfort , for he still draw it round him in spite of the hot glare of the faggot . the other , clad in a dirty russet suit with a long sweeping doublet , have a cunning , foxy face with keen , twinkle eye and a peaky beard . next to him sit , and beside him three other rough unkempt fellow with tangled beard and matted laborer from the adjoining farm , where small patch of freehold property have be suffer to remain scatter about in the heart of the royal demesne . the company be complete by a peasant in a rude dress of sheepskin , with the old-fashioned galligaskins about his leg , and a dress young man with striped cloak jag at the edge and hosen , who look about him with high disdain upon his face , and hold a blue to his nose with one hand , while he brandish a busy spoon with the other . in the corner a very fat man be lie all upon a truss , snore stertorously , and evidently in the last stage of drunkenness . " that be the limner , " quoth the landlady , sit down beside , and point with the ladle to the sleeping man . " that be he who paint the sign and the token . and alas that ever i should have be fool enough to trust him ! now , young man , what manner of a bird would you suppose a pied merlin to be the proper sign of my hostel ? " " why , " say , " a merlin be a bird of the same form as an eagle or a falcon . i can well remember that learn brother , who be deep in all the secret of nature , point one out to me as we walk together near . " " a falcon or an eagle , ? and pied , that be of two several color . so any man would say except this barrel of lie . he come to me , look you , say that if i would furnish him with a gallon of ale , wherewith to strengthen himself as he work , and also the pigment and a board , he would paint for me a noble pied merlin which i might hang along with the blazonry over my door . i , poor simple fool , give him the ale and all that he crave , leave him alone too , because he say that a man 's mind must be leave untroubled when he have great work to do . when i come back the gallon jar be empty , and he lie as you see him , with the board in front of him with this sorry device . " she raise up a panel which be lean against the wall , and show a rude painting of a scraggy and angular fowl , with very long leg and a spotted body . " be that , " she ask , " like the bird which thou see ? " shake his head , smile . " no , nor any other bird that ever wag a feather . it be most like a pluck pullet which have die of the spotted fever . and scarlet too ! what would the gentle , or , of , say if they see such a , perhaps , even the 's own himself , who often have ride past this way , and who love his falcon as he love his son ? it would be the downfall of my house . " " the matter be not past mending , " say . " i pray you , good dame , to give me those three and the brush , and i shall try whether i can better this painting . " look doubtfully at him , as though fear some other stratagem , but , as he make no demand for ale , she finally bring the paint , and watch him as he smear on his background , talk the while about the folk round the fire . " the four forest lad must be jog soon , " she say . " they bide at , a mile or more from here . yeoman pricker they be , who tend to the 's hunt . the gleeman be call . he come from the north country , but for many year he have go the round of the forest from to . he drink much and pay little but it would make your rib crackle to hear him sing ' of . ' he will sing it when the ale have warm him . " " who be those next to him ? " ask , much interested . " he of the fur mantle have a wise and reverent face . " " he be a seller of pill and salve , very learn in humor , and rheum , and flux , and all manner of ailment . he wear , as you perceive , the of , the first physician , upon his sleeve . good of grant that it may be long before either i or mine need his help ! he be here for , as be the other except the forester . his neighbor be a . that bag at his girdle be full of the tooth that he draw at fair . i warrant that there be more sound one than sorry , for he be quick at his work and a trifle dim in the eye . the lusty man next him with the red head i have not see before . the four on this side be all worker , three of them in the service of the bailiff of , and the other , he with the sheepskin , be , as i hear , a villein from the midland who have run from his master . his year and day be well-nigh up , when he will be a free man . " " and the other ? " ask in a whisper . " he be surely some very great man , for he look as though he scorn those who be about him . " the landlady look at him in a motherly way and shake her head . " you have have no great truck with the world , " she say , " or you would have learn that it be the small man and not the great who hold their nose in the air . look at those shield upon my wall and under my eaves . each of them be the device of some noble lord or gallant knight who have sleep under my roof at one time or another . yet mild man or easy to please i have never see : eat my bacon and drink my wine with a merry face , and pay my score with some courteous word or jest which be dear to me than my profit . those be the true gentle . but your chapman or your will swear that there be a lime in the wine , and water in the ale , and fling off at the last with a curse instead of a blessing . this youth be a scholar from , where man be wont to be blow out by a little knowledge , and lose the use of their hand in learn the law of the roman . but i must away to lay down the bed . so may the saint keep you and prosper you in your undertaking ! " thus leave to himself , draw his panel of wood where the light of one of the torch would strike full upon it , and work away with all the pleasure of the trained craftsman , listen the while to the talk which go on round the fire . the peasant in the sheepskin , who have sit glum and silent all evening , have be so heat by his flagon of ale that he be talk loudly and angrily with clench hand and flash eye . " of may till his own field for me , " he cry . " the castle have throw its shadow upon the cottage over long . for three hundred year my folk have swink and sweat , day in and day out , to keep the wine on the lord 's table and the harness on the lord 's back . let him take off his plate and delve himself , if delve must be do . " " a proper spirit , my fair son ! " say one of the free laborer . " i would that all man be of way of thinking . " " he would have sell me with his acre , " the other cry , in a voice which be hoarse with passion . " ' the man , the woman and their run the word of the dotard bailiff . never a bullock on the farm be sell more lightly . ! he may wake some black night to find the flame lick about his fire be a good friend to the poor man , and i have see a smoking heap of ash where over night there stand just such another as . " " this be a lad of mettle ! " shout another of the laborer . " he dare to give tongue to what all man think . be we not all from 's loin , all with flesh and blood , and with the same mouth that must needs have food and drink ? where all this difference then between the ermine cloak and the leathern tunic , if what they cover be the same ? " " , , " say another , " our foeman be under the stole and the vestment as much as under the helmet and plate of proof . we have as much to fear from the tonsure as from the hauberk . strike at the noble and the priest shriek , strike at priest and the noble lay his hand upon glaive . they be twin thief who live upon our labor . " " it would take a clever man to live upon labor , , " remark one of the forester , " see that the half of time be spend in swill mead at ' . ' " " that than steal the deer that thou art place to guard , like some folk i know . " " if you dare open that swine 's mouth against me , " shout the woodman , " i will crop your ear for you before the hangman have the do of it , thou . " " nay , gentle , gentle ! " cry , in a singsong heedless voice , which show that such be nightly thing among her guest . " no brawl or brabble , gentle ! take heed to the good name of the house . " " besides , if it come to the crop of ear , there be other folk who may say their say , " quoth the third laborer . " we be all freeman , and i trow that a yeoman 's cudgel be as good as a forester 's knife . by ! it would be an evil day if we have to bend to our master 's servant as well as to our master . " " no man be my master save the , " the woodman answer . " who be there , save a false traitor , who would refuse to serve the english king ? " " i know not about the english king , " say the man . " what sort of english king be it who can lay his tongue to a word of ? you mind last year when he come down to , with his inner marshal and his outer marshal , his justiciar , his seneschal , and his four and twenty guardsman . one noontide i be by 's gate , when up he ride with a yeoman pricker at his heel . ' , ' he cry , ' , ' or some such word , make sign for me to open the gate ; and then ' , ' as though he be of me . and you talk of an english king ? " " i do not marvel at it , " cry the scholar , speak in the high drawl voice which be common among his class . " it be not a tongue for man of sweet birth and delicate upbringing . it be a foul , snort , snarl manner of speech . for myself , i swear by the learn that i have most ease with , and after that perchance with . " " i will not hear a word say against old , " cry in a voice like a bull . " what if he be fond of a bright eye and a saucy face . i know one of his subject who could match him at that . if he can speak like an englishman i trow that he can fight like an englishman , and he be hammer at the gate of while ale-house be and grumble at home . " this loud speech , come from a man of so formidable an appearance , somewhat daunt the disloyal party , and they fall into a sullen silence , which enable to hear something of the talk which be go on in the further corner between the physician , the and the gleeman . " a raw rat , " the man of drug be say , " that be what it be ever my use to order for the raw rat with its paunch cut open . " " might it not be broil , most learn sir ? " ask the . " a raw rat sound a most sorry and cheerless dish . " " not to be eat , " cry the physician , in high disdain . " why should any man eat such a thing ? " " why indeed ? " ask the gleeman , take a long drain at his tankard . " it be to be place on the sore or swell . for the rat , mark you , be a creature , have a natural drawing or affinity for all foul thing , so that the noxious humor pass from the man into the unclean beast . " " would that cure the black death , master ? " ask . " aye , truly would it , my fair son . " " then i be right glad that there be none who know of it . the black death be the good friend that ever the common folk have in . " " how that then ? " ask . " why , friend , it be easy to see that you have not work with your hand or you would not need to ask . when half the folk in the country be dead it be then that the other half could pick and choose who they would work for , and for what wage . that be why i say that the murrain be the good friend that the folk ever have . " " true , , " say another workman ; " but it be not all good that be bring by it either . we well know that through it have be turn into pasture , so that flock of sheep with perchance a single shepherd wander now where once a hundred man have work and wage . " " there be no great harm in that , " remark the , " for the sheep give many folk their living . there be not only the herd , but the shearer and brander , and then the dresser , the curer , the dyer , the fuller , the webster , the merchant , and a score of other . " " if it come to that , " say one of the forester , " the tough meat of them will wear folk tooth out , and there be a trade for the man who can draw them . " a general laugh follow this sally at the dentist 's expense , in the midst of which the gleeman place his battered harp upon his knee , and begin to pick out a melody upon the fray string . " elbow room for ! " cry the woodman . " twang us a merry lilt . " " , aye , ' lass of , ' " one suggest . " or ' and the . ' " " or ' of . ' " to all these suggestion the jongleur make no response , but sit with his eye fix abstractedly upon the ceiling , as one who call word to his mind . then , with a sudden sweep across the string , he break out into a song so gross and so foul that ere he have finish a verse the lad spring to his foot with the blood tingle in his face . " how can you sing such thing ? " he cry . " you , too , an old man who should be an example to other . " the wayfarer all gaze in the utmost astonishment at the interruption . " by the holy of ! our silent clerk have find his tongue , " say one of the woodman . " what be amiss with the song then ? how have it offend your ? " " a mild and good mannered song have never be hear within these wall , " cry another . " what sort of talk be this for a public inn ? " " shall it be a litany , my good clerk ? " shout a third ; " or would a hymn be good enough to serve ? " the jongleur have put down his harp in high dudgeon . " be i to be preach to by a child ? " he cry , stare across at with an inflame and angry countenance . " be a hairless infant to raise his tongue against me , when i have sing in every fair from to , and have twice be name aloud by the of the at ? i shall sing no more . " " , but you will so , " say one of the laborer . " hi , , bring a stoup of your good to to clear his throat . go forward with song , and if our clerk do not love it he can take to the road and go whence he come . " " , but not too last , " break in . " there be two word in this matter . it may be that my little comrade have be over quick in reproof , he have go early into the cloister and see little of the rough way and word of the world . yet there be truth in what he say , for , as you know well , the song be not of the clean . i shall stand by him , therefore , and he shall neither be put out on the road , nor shall his ear be offend indoors . " " indeed , your high and mighty grace , " sneer one of the yeoman , " have you in sooth so ordain ? " " by the ! " say a second , " i think that you may both chance to find upon the road before long . " " and so belabor as to be scarce able to crawl along it , " cry a third . " nay , i shall go ! i shall go ! " say hurriedly , as begin to slowly roll up his sleeve , and bare an arm like a leg of mutton . " i would not have you brawl about me . " " ! lad , " he whisper , " i count them not a fly . they may find they have more tow on their distaff than they know how to spin . stand thou clear and give me space . " both the forester and the laborer have rise from their bench , and and the travel doctor have fling themselves between the two party with soft word and soothing gesture , when the door of the " " be fling violently open , and the attention of the company be draw from their own quarrel to the new-comer who have burst so unceremoniously upon them . he be a middle-sized man , of most massive and robust build , with an arch chest and extraordinary breadth of shoulder . his shaven face be as brown as a , tan and dry by the weather , with harsh , well-marked feature , which be not improve by a long white scar which stretch from the corner of his leave nostril to the angle of the jaw . his eye be bright and search , with something of menace and of authority in their quick glitter , and his mouth be and hard , as befit one who be wont to set his face against danger . a straight sword by his side and a painted jut over his shoulder proclaim his profession , while his scar brigandine of chain-mail and his dint steel cap show that he be no holiday soldier , but one who be even now fresh from the war . a white surcoat with the lion of in red upon the centre cover his broad breast , while a sprig of broom at the side of his give a touch of and grace to his grim , equipment . " ! " he cry , blink like an owl in the sudden glare . " good even to you , comrade ! ! a woman , by my soul ! " and in an instant he have clip round the waist and be kiss her violently . his eye happen to wander upon the maid , however , he instantly abandon the mistress and dance off after the other , who scurry in confusion up one of the ladder , and drop the heavy trap-door upon her pursuer . he then turn back and salute the landlady once more with the utmost relish and satisfaction . " la petite be frightened , " say he . " ah , , ! curse this trick of , which will stick to my throat . i must wash it out with some good english ale . by my hilt ! , there be no drop of french blood in my body , and i be a true english bowman , by name ; and i tell you , mes ami , that it warm my very to set my foot on the dear old land once more . when i come off the galley at , this very day , i down on my bone , and i kiss the good brown earth , as i kiss now , ma belle , for it be eight long year since i have see it . the very smell of it seem life to me . but where be my six rascal ? , there ! en avant ! " at the order , six man , dress as common drudge , march solemnly into the room , each bearing a huge bundle upon his head . they form in military line , while the soldier stand in front of them with stern eye , check off their several package . " number french feather-bed with the two of white , " say he . " here , worthy sir , " answer the first of the bearer , lay a great package down in the corner . " number ell of red cloth and nine ell of cloth of gold . put it down by the other . good dame , i give each of these man a of wine or a jack of ale . full piece of white velvet with twelve ell of purple silk . thou rascal , there be dirt on the hem ! thou brush it against some wall , ! " " not i , most worthy sir , " cry the carrier , shrink away from the fierce eye of the bowman . " i say yes , dog ! by the three king ! i have see a man gasp out his last breath for less . have you go through the pain and unease that i have do to earn these thing you would be at more care . i swear by my ten that there be not one of them that have not cost its weight in french blood ! , a ewer of silver , a gold buckle and a cope work in pearl . i find them , , at the of in the harry of , and i take them away with me lest they fall into the hand of the wicked . cloak of fur turn up with , a gold goblet with stand and cover , and a box of rose-colored sugar . see that you lie them together . box of monies , three pound of , a pair of boot , silver tag , and , lastly , a store of linen . so , the tally be complete ! here be a groat apiece , and you may go . " " go whither , worthy sir ? " ask one of the carrier . " whither ? to the devil if will . what be it to me ? now , ma belle , to supper . a pair of cold capon , a of brawn , or what you will , with a flask or two of the right . i have crown in my pouch , my sweet , and i mean to spend them . bring in wine while the food be dress . my brave lad ; you shall each empty a stoup with me . " here be an offer which the company in an english inn at that or any other date be slow to refuse . the flagon be and come back with the white foam drip over their edge . two of the woodman and three of the laborer drink their portion off hurriedly and troop off together , for their home be distant and the hour late . the other , however , draw closer , leave the place of honor to the right of the gleeman to the free-handed new-comer . he have throw off his steel cap and his brigandine , and have place them with his sword , his quiver and his painted , on the top of his varied heap of plunder in the corner . now , with his thick and somewhat bow leg stretch in front of the blaze , his green jerkin throw open , and a great quart pot hold in his corded fist , he look the picture of comfort and of good-fellowship . his hard-set face have soften , and the thick crop of crisp brown curl which have be hide by his helmet grow low upon his massive neck . he might have be forty year of age , though hard toil and hard pleasure have leave their grim mark upon his feature . have cease paint his pied merlin , and sit , brush in hand , stare with open eye at a type of man so strange and so unlike any whom he have meet . man have be good or have be bad in his catalogue , but here be a man who be fierce one instant and gentle the next , with a curse on his lip and a smile in his eye . what be to be make of such a man as that ? it chance that the soldier look up and see the questioning glance which the young clerk throw upon him . he raise his flagon and drink to him , with a merry flash of his white tooth . " a , garcon , " he cry . " surely never see a man-at-arms , that thou shouldst stare so ? " " i never have , " say frankly , " though i have oft hear talk of their deed . " " by my hilt ! " cry the other , " if you be to cross the narrow sea you would find them as thick as bee at a . not shoot a bolt down any street of , i warrant , but you would pink archer , squire , or knight . there be more breastplate than gaberdine to be see , i promise you . " " and where get you all these pretty thing ? " ask , point at the heap in the corner . " where there be as much more wait for any brave lad to pick it up . where a good man can always earn a good wage , and where he need look upon no man as his paymaster , but just reach his hand out and help himself . aye , it be a goodly and a proper life . and here i drink to mine old comrade , and the saint be with them ! arouse all together , mes enfants , under pain of my displeasure . to and the company ! " " and the company ! " shout the traveller , drain off their goblet . " well quaff , mes brave ! it be for me to fill your cup again , since you have drain them to my dear lad of the white jerkin . ! , bring wine and ale . how run the old stave ? -- - we will drink all together to the gray goose feather and the land where the gray goose fly . " he roar out the catch in a harsh , unmusical voice , and end with a shout of laughter . " i trust that i be a good bowman than a minstrel , " say he . " methinks i have some remembrance of the lilt , " remark the gleeman , run his finger over the string . " hope that it will give no offence , most holy a vicious snap at with the kind permit of the company , i will even venture upon it . " many a time in the after day seem to see that scene , for all that so many which be strange and more stir be soon to crowd upon him . the fat , red-faced gleeman , the listen group , the archer with upraise finger beating in time to the music , and the huge sprawling figure of , all throw into red light and black shadow by the flicker fire in the be to come often lovingly back to it . at the time he be lose in admiration at the deft way in which the jongleur disguise the loss of his two missing string , and the lusty , hearty fashion in which he troll out his little ballad of the outland bowman , which run in some such fashion as this : what of the bow ? the bow be make in : of true wood , of yew wood , the wood of english bow ; so man who be free love the old yew tree and the land where the yew tree grow . what of the cord ? the cord be make in : a rough cord , a tough cord , a cord that bowman love ; so we will drain our jack to the english flax and the land where the hemp be weave . what of the shaft ? the shaft be cut in : a long shaft , a strong shaft , barbed and trim and true ; so we will drink all together to the gray goose feather and the land where the gray goose fly . what of the man ? the man be breed in : the -- the lad of dale and fall here be to to you ; to the heart that be true and the land where the true heart dwell . " well sing , by my hilt ! " shout the archer in high delight . " many a night have i hear that song , both in the old and after in the day of the , when of would lead the stave , and four hundred of the good bowman that ever draw string would come roar in upon the chorus . i have see old , the same who have lead half the company into , stand laugh in his beard as he hear it , until his plate rattle again . but to get the full smack of it must be english bowman , and be far off upon an outland soil . " whilst the song have be sing and the maid have place a board across two trestle , and have lay upon it the knife , the spoon , the salt , the of bread , and finally the smoking dish which hold the savory supper . the archer settle himself to it like one who have know what it be to find good food scarce ; but his tongue still go as merrily as his tooth . " it pass me , " he cry , " how all you lusty fellow can bide scratch your back at home when there be such doing over the sea . look at have i to do ? it be but the eye to the cord , the cord to the shaft , and the shaft to the mark . there be the whole song of it . it be but what you do for pleasure upon a evening at the parish village butt . " " and the wage ? " ask a laborer . " you see what the wage bring , " he answer . " i eat of the good , and i drink deep . i treat my friend , and i ask no friend to treat me . i clap a silk gown on my girl 's back . never a knight 's lady shall be well and . how of all that , garcon ? and how of the heap of trifle that you can see for in yonder corner ? they be from the , every one , upon whom i have be make war . by my hilt ! , i think that i may let my plunder speak for itself . " " it seem indeed to be a goodly service , " say the . " ! yes , indeed . then there be the chance of a ransom . why , look you , in the affair at some four year back , when the company slay of , and put his army to the sword , there be scarce a man of ours who have not count , baron , or knight . , who be but a common country lout newly bring over , with the english flea still hop under his doublet , lay his great hand upon the , who own half , and have five thousand crown out of him , with his horse and harness . ' true that a french wench take it all off as quick as the frenchman pay it ; but what then ? by the twang of string ! it would be a bad thing if money be not make to be spend ; and how good than on , ma belle ? " " it would indeed be a bad thing if we have not our brave archer to bring wealth and kindly custom into the country , " quoth , on whom the soldier 's free and open way have make a deep impression . " a , ma ! " say he , with his hand over his heart . " ! there be la petite peep from behind the door . a , , ma petite ! ! but the lass have a good color ! " " there be one thing , fair sir , " say the student in his piping voice , " which i would fain that you would make more clear . as i understand it , there be peace make at the town of some six year back between our most gracious monarch and the of the french . this be so , it seem most passing strange that you should talk so loudly of war and of company when there be no quarrel between the french and us . " " mean that i lie , " say the archer , lay down his knife . " heaven forfend ! " cry the student hastily . " , which mean in the latin tongue that archer be all honorable man . i come to you seek knowledge , for it be my trade to learn . " " i fear that you be yet a ' prentice to that trade , " quoth the soldier ; " for there be no child over the water but could answer what you ask . know then that though there may be peace between our own province and the french , yet within the march of there be always war , for the country be much divide against itself , and be furthermore harry by band of flayer , skinner , , , and the rest of them . when every man 's grip be on his neighbor 's throat , and every of a baron be march with tuck of drum to fight whom he will , it would be a strange thing if five hundred brave english boy could not pick up a living . now that have go with the east anglian lad and the woodman into the service of the of to fight against the of , there be but ten score of us leave , yet i trust that i may be able to bring some back with me to fill the rank of the . by the tooth of ! it would be a bad thing if i could not muster many a man who would be ready to strike in under the red flag of , and the more so if , of , should don hauberk once more and take the lead of us . " " ah , you would indeed be in luck then , " quoth a woodman ; " for it be say that , set aside the prince , and mayhap good old , there be not in the whole army a man of such tried courage . " " it be sooth , every word of it , " the archer answer . " i have see him with these two eye in a stricken field , and never do man carry himself good . ! yes , would not credit it to look at him , or to hearken to his soft voice , but from the sailing from down to the foray to , and that be clear twenty year , there be not a skirmish , , sally , , or battle , but be in the heart of it . i go now to with a letter to him from to ask him if he will take the place of ; and there be the more chance that he will if i bring one or two likely man at my heel . what say you , woodman : wilt leave the buck to loose a shaft at a noble mark ? " the forester shake his head . " i have wife and child at , " quoth he ; " i would not leave them for such a venture . " " you , then , young sir ? " ask the archer . " nay , i be a man of peace , " say . " besides , i have other work to do . " " ! " growl the soldier , strike his flagon on the board until the dish dance again . " what , in the name of the devil , have come over the folk ? why sit all mope by the fireside , like crow round a dead horse , when there be man 's work to be do within a few short league of ? out upon you all , as a set of laggard and ! by my hilt i believe that the man of be all in already , and that what be leave behind be in sooth the woman dress up in their and hosen . " " , " quoth , " you have lie more than once and more than twice ; for which , and also because i see much in you to dislike , i be sorely tempt to lay you upon your back . " " by my hilt ! then , i have find a man at last ! " shout the bowman . " and , ' fore , you be a good man than i take you for if you can lay me on my back , garcon . i have win the ram more time than there be toe to my foot , and for seven long year i have find no man in the company who could make my jerkin dusty . " " we have have enough and boast , " say , rise and throw off his doublet . " i will show you that there be good man leave in than ever go thieve to . " " ! " cry the archer , loosen his jerkin , and eye his foeman over with the keen glance of one who be a judge of manhood . " i have only once before see such a body of a man . by your leave , my red-headed friend , i should be right sorry to exchange buffet with you ; and i will allow that there be no man in the company who would pull against you on a rope ; so let that be a salve to your pride . on the other hand i should judge that you have lead a life of ease for some month back , and that my muscle be hard than your own . i be ready to wager upon myself against you if you be not afeard . " " afeard , thou ! " growl big . " i never see the face yet of the man that i be afeard of . come out , and we shall see who be the good man . " " but the wager ? " " i have nought to wager . come out for the love and the lust of the thing . " " nought to wager ! " cry the soldier . " why , you have that which i covet above all thing . it be that big body of thine that i be after . see , now , garcon . i have a french feather-bed there , which i have be at pain to keep these year back . i have it at the sacking of , and the himself have not such a bed . if you throw me , it be thine ; but , if i throw you , then you be under a vow to take bow and bill and hie with me to , there to serve in the company as long as we be enroll . " " a fair wager ! " cry all the traveller , move back their bench and trestle , so as to give fair field for the wrestler . " then you may bid farewell to your bed , soldier , " say . " nay ; i shall keep the bed , and i shall have you to in spite of your tooth , and you shall live to thank me for it . how shall it be , then , enfant ? collar and elbow , or , or catch how you can ? " " to the devil with your trick , " say , open and shut his great red hand . " stand forth , and let me clip . " " shalt clip me as good you can then , " quoth the archer , move out into the open space , and keep a most wary eye upon his opponent . he have throw off his green jerkin , and his chest be cover only by a pink silk jupon , or undershirt , cut low in the neck and sleeveless . be strip from his waist upwards , and his huge body , with his great muscle swell out like the gnarled root of an oak , towered high above the soldier . the other , however , though near a foot short , be a man of great strength ; and there be a gloss upon his white skin which be want in the heavy limb of the renegade monk . he be quick on his foot , too , and skilled at the game ; so that it be clear , from the poise of head and shine of eye , that he count the chance to be in his favor . it would have be hard that night , through the whole length of , to set up a fine pair in face of each other . stand wait in the centre with a sullen , menace eye , and his red hair in a bristle , while the archer pace lightly and swiftly to the right and the left with crooked knee and hand advance . then with a sudden dash , so swift and fierce that the eye could scarce follow it , he fly in upon his man and lock his leg round him . it be a grip that , between man of equal strength , would mean a fall ; but tear him off from him as he might a rat , and hurl him across the room , so that his head crack up against the wooden wall . " ! " cry the bowman , pass his finger through his curl , " you be not far from the feather-bed then , gar . a little more and this good hostel would have a new window . " nothing daunt , he approach his man once more , but this time with more caution than before . with a quick feint he throw the other off his guard , and then , bound upon him , throw his leg round his waist and his arm round his bull-neck , in the hope of bear him to the ground with the sudden shock . with a bellow of rage , squeeze him limp in his huge arm ; and then , pick him up , cast him down upon the floor with a force which might well have splinter a bone or two , have not the archer with the most perfect coolness cling to the other 's forearm to break his fall . as it be , he drop upon his foot and keep his balance , though it send a jar through his frame which set every joint . he bound back from his perilous foeman ; but the other , heated by the bout , rush madly after him , and so give the practise wrestler the very vantage for which he have plan . as big fling himself upon him , the archer duck under the great red hand that clutch for him , and , catch his man round the thigh , hurl him over his as much by his own mad rush as by the trained strength of the heave . to 's eye , it be as if have take unto himself wing and flow . as he hurtle through the air , with giant limb revolving , the lad 's heart be in his mouth ; for surely no man ever yet have such a fall and come out of it . in truth , hardy as the man be , his neck have be assuredly break have he not pitch head first on the very midriff of the drunken artist , who be slumber so peacefully in the corner , all unaware of these stirring doings . the luckless limner , thus suddenly bring out from his dream , sit up with a piercing yell , while bound back into the circle almost as rapidly as he have leave it . " one more fall , by all the saint ! " he cry , throw out his arm . " not i , " quoth the archer , pull on his clothes , " i have come well out of the business . i would sooner wrestle with the great bear of . " " it be a trick , " cry . " be it . by my ten ! it be a trick that will add a proper man to the rank of the company . " " oh , for that , " say the other , " i count it not a fly ; for i have promise myself a good hour ago that i should go with , since the life seem to be a goodly and proper one . yet i would fain have have the feather-bed . " " i doubt it not , ami , " quoth the archer , go back to his tankard . " here be to , lad , and may we be good comrade to each other ! but , ! what be it that ail our friend of the wrathful face ? " the unfortunate limner have be sit up rub himself ruefully and stare about with a vacant gaze , which show that he know neither where he be nor what have occur to him . suddenly , however , a flash of intelligence have come over his sodden feature , and he rise and stagger for the door . " ' the ale ! " he say in a hoarse whisper , shake a warning finger at the company . " oh , holy , ' ware the ale ! " and slap his hand to his injury , he flit off into the darkness , amid a shout of laughter , in which the vanquish join as merrily as the victor . the remain forester and the two laborer be also ready for the road , and the rest of the company turn to the blanket which and the maid have lay out for them upon the floor . , weary with the unwonted excitement of the day , be soon in a deep slumber break only by fleeting vision of twitter leg , curse beggar , black robber , and the many strange folk whom he have meet at the " . " at early dawn the country inn be all alive , for it be rare indeed that an hour of daylight would be waste at a time when lighting be so scarce and dear . indeed , early as it be when begin to stir , it seem that other could be earlier still , for the door be ajar , and the learn student of have take himself off , with a mind which be too intent upon the high thing of antiquity to stoop to consider the which he owe for bed and board . it be the shrill of the landlady when she find her loss , and the cluck of the hen , which have stream in through the open door , that first break in upon the slumber of the tired wayfarer . once afoot , it be not long before the company begin to disperse . a sleek mule with red trapping be bring round from some neighboring shed for the physician , and he amble away with much dignity upon his road to . the and the gleeman call for a cup of small ale apiece , and start off together for fair , the old jongleur look very yellow in the eye and swell in the face after his overnight potation . the archer , however , who have drink more than any man in the room , be as merry as a grig , and have kiss the matron and chase the maid up the ladder once more , he go out to the brook , and come back with the water drip from his face and hair . " ! my man of peace , " he cry to , " whither be you bend this morning ? " " to , " quoth he . " my brother be socman there , and i go to bide with him for a while . i , let me have my score , good dame . " " score , indeed ! " cry she , stand with upraise hand in front of the panel on which have work the night before . " say , rather what it be that i owe to , good youth . aye , this be indeed a pied merlin , and with a leveret under its claw , as i be a live woman . by the rood of ! but touch be deft and dainty . " " and see the red eye of it ! " cry the maid . " aye , and the open beak . " " and the ruffle wing , " add . " by my hilt ! " cry the archer , " it be the very bird itself . " the young clerk flush with pleasure at this chorus of praise , rude and indiscriminate indeed , and yet so much hearty and less grudging than any which he have ever hear from the critical brother , or the short-spoken . there be , it would seem , great kindness as well as great wickedness in this world , of which he have hear so little that be good . his hostess would hear nothing of his pay either for bed or for board , while the archer and place a hand upon either shoulder and lead him off to the board , where some smoking fish , a dish of spinach , and a jug of milk be lay out for their breakfast . " i should not be surprise to learn , , " say the soldier , as he heap a slice of fish upon 's of bread , " that you could read written thing , since you be so ready with your brush and pigment . " " it would be shame to the good brother of if i could not , " he answer , " see that i have be their clerk this ten year back . " the bowman look at him with great respect . " think of that ! " say he . " and you with not a hair to your face , and a skin like a girl . i can shoot three hundred and fifty pace with my little popper there , and four hundred and twenty with the great ; yet i can make nothing of this , nor read my own name if you be to set ' ' up against me . in the whole company there be only one man who could read , and he fall down a well at the taking of , which prove that the thing be not suit to a soldier , though most needful to a clerk . " " i can make some show at it , " say big ; " though i be scarce long enough among the monk to catch the whole trick of it . " here , then , be something to try upon , " quoth the archer , pull a square of parchment from the inside of his tunic . it be tie securely with a broad band of purple silk , and firmly seal at either end with a large red seal . pore long and earnestly over the inscription upon the back , with his brow bend as one who bear up against great mental strain . " not have read much of late , " he say , " i be loth to say too much about what this may be . some might say one thing and some another , just as one bowman love the yew , and a second will not shoot save with the ash . to me , by the length and the look of it , i should judge this to be a verse from one of the . " the bowman shake his head . " it be scarce likely , " he say , " that should send me all the way across sea with nought more weighty than a . you have clean overshoot the butt this time , . give it to the little one . i will wager my feather-bed that he make more sense of it . " " why , it be write in the french tongue , " say , " and in a right clerkly hand . this be how it run : ' a le moult puissant et moult honorable chevalier , , son tre ami , blanche , chatelain , grand seigneur , de le , , tenant les droit justice , de la milieu , et de la . ' which signify in our speech : ' to the very powerful and very honorable knight , of , from his very faithful friend , captain of the , chatelain of , grand lord of and vassal to the renowned , of , who hold the right of the high justice , the middle and the low . ' " " look at that now ! " cry the bowman in triumph . " that be just what he would have say . " " i can see now that it be even so , " say , examine the parchment again . " though i scarce understand this high , middle and low . " " by my hilt ! you would understand it if you be . the low justice mean that you may fleece him , and the middle that you may torture him , and the high that you may slay him . that be about the truth of it . but this be the letter which i be to take ; and since the platter be clean it be time that we truss up and be afoot . you come with me , ; and as to you , little one , where do you say that you journey ? " " to . " " ah , yes . i know this forest country well , though i be bear myself in the of , in the of , hard by the village of . yet i have not a word to say against the man , for there be no good comrade or true archer in the whole company than some who learn to loose the string in these very part . we shall travel round with you to lad , see that it be little out of our way . " " i be ready , " say , right please at the thought of such company upon the road . " so be not i. i must store my plunder at this inn , since the hostess be an honest woman . ! ma , i wish to leave with you my , my velvet , my silk , my feather bed , my , my ewer , my linen , and all the rest of it . i take only the money in a linen bag , and the box of rise colored sugar which be a gift from my captain to the . wilt guard my treasure for me ? " " it shall be put in the safe loft , good archer . come when you may , you shall find it ready for you . " " now , there be a true friend ! " cry the bowman , take her hand . " there be a bonne amie ! english land and english woman , say i , and french wine and french plunder . i shall be back anon , . i be a lonely man , my sweeting , and i must settle some day when the war be over and do . mayhap you and , , ! there be la petite peep from behind the door . now , , the sun be over the tree ; you must be brisk than this when the blow ' bow and bill . ' " " i have be wait this time back , " say gruffly . " then we must be off . adieu , ma vie ! the two livre shall settle the score and buy some ribbon against the next . do not forget , for his heart shall ever be thine thine , ma petite ! so , , and may grant us as good quarter elsewhere ! " the sun have rise over and wood , and be shine brightly , though the eastern wind have a sharp flavor to it , and the leave be flicker thickly from the tree . in the of the wayfarer have to pick their way , for the little town be crowd with the guardsman , groom , and yeoman pricker who be attach to the 's hunt . the himself be stay at , but several of his suite have be compel to seek such quarter as they might find in the wooden or cottage of the village . here and there a small escutcheon , peep from a glassless window , mark the night 's lodging of knight or baron . these could be read , where a scroll would be meaningless , and the bowman , like most man of his age , be well verse in the common symbol of heraldry . " there be the saracen 's head of , " quoth he . " i see him last at the ruffle at some ten year back , when he bear himself like a man . he be the master of the 's horse , and can sing a right jovial stave , though in that he can come nigh to , who be first at the board or in the saddle . three martlet on a field azure , that must be one of the . by the crescent upon it , it should be the second son of old , who have a bolt through his ankle at the of , he have rush into the fray ere his squire have time to clasp his solleret to his greave . there too be the hackle which be the old device of the . i have serve under , who be as jolly as a pie , and a lusty swordsman until he get too fat for his harness . " so the archer gossip as the three wayfarer thread their way among the stamp horse , the busy groom , and the knot of page and squire who dispute over the merit of their master ' horse and . as they pass the old church , which stand upon a mound at the left-hand side of the village street the door be fling open , and a stream of worshipper wind down the sloping path , come from the morning mass , all chatter like a cloud of jay . bent knee and doff hat at the sight of the open door ; but ere he have finish an his comrade be out of sight round the curve of the path , and he have to run to overtake them . " what ! " he say , " not one word of prayer before 's own open house ? how can hope for his blessing upon the day ? " " my friend , " say , " i have pray so much during the last two month , not only during the day , but at matins , laud , and the like , when i could scarce keep my head upon my shoulder for nod , that i feel that i have somewhat myself . " " how can a man have too much religion ? " cry earnestly . " it be the one thing that . a man be but a beast as he live from day to day , eat and drink , breathe and sleep . it be only when he raise himself , and concern himself with the immortal spirit within him , that he become in very truth a man . bethink how sad a thing it would be that the blood of the should be spill to no purpose . " " bless the lad , if he do not blush like any girl , and yet preach like the whole of , " cry the archer . " in truth i blush that any one so weak and so unworthy as i should try to teach another that which he find it so pass hard to follow himself . " " prettily say , garcon . touch that same slaying of the , it be a bad business . a good padre in read to us from a scroll the whole truth of the matter . the soldier come upon him in the garden . in truth , these of his may have be holy man , but they be of no great account as man-at-arms . there be one , indeed , , who smite out like a true man ; but , unless he be belie , he do but clip a varlet 's ear , which be no very knightly deed . by these ten ! have i be there with of , and but one score pick man of the company , we have hold them in play . could we do no more , we have at least fill the false knight , , so full of english arrow that he would curse the day that ever he come on such an errand . " the young clerk smile at his companion 's earnestness . " have he wish help , " he say , " he could have summon legion of archangel from heaven , so what need have he of your poor bow and arrow ? besides , bethink you of his own those who live by the sword shall perish by the sword . " " and how could man die well ? " ask the archer . " if i have my wish , it would be to fall , mark you , in any mere skirmish of the company , but in a stricken field , with the great lion banner wave over us and the red oriflamme in front , amid the shouting of my fellow and the twang of the string . but let it be sword , lance , or bolt that strike me down : for i should think it shame to die from an iron ball from the or bombard or any such weapon , which be only fit to scare babe with its foolish noise and smoke . " " i have hear much even in the quiet cloister of these new and dreadful engine , " quoth . " it be say , though i can scarce bring myself to believe it , that they will send a ball twice as far as a bowman can shoot his shaft , and with such force as to break through armor of proof . " " true enough , my lad . but while the armorer be thrust in his , and drop his ball , and light his flambeau , i can very easily loose six shaft , or eight maybe , so he have no great vantage after all . yet i will not deny that at the of a town it be well to have good store of bombard . i be tell that at they make dint in the wall that a man might put his head into . but surely , comrade , some one who be grievously hurt have pass along this road before us . " all along the woodland track there do indeed run a scattered straggle trail of , sometimes in single drop , and in other place in broad , ruddy gout , smudge over the dead leave or crimson the white flint stone . " it must be a stricken deer , " say . " nay , i be woodman enough to see that no deer have pass this way this morning ; and yet the blood be fresh . but hark to the sound ! " they stand listen all three with sidelong head . through the silence of the great forest there come a swish , whistle sound , mingle with the most dolorous groan , and the voice of a man raise in a high quaver kind of song . the comrade hurry onwards eagerly , and top the brow of a small rising they see upon the other side the source from which these strange noise arise . a tall man , much stoop in the shoulder , be walk slowly with head and clasp hand in the centre of the path . he be dress from head to foot in a long white linen cloth , and a high white cap with a red cross print upon it . his gown be turn back from his shoulder , and the flesh there be a sight to make a man wince , for it be all beat to a pulp , and the blood be soak into his gown and trickle down upon the ground . behind him walk a small man with his hair touch with gray , who be clad in the same white garb . he intone a long whine rhyme in the french tongue , and at the end of every line he raise a thick cord , all jag with pellet of lead , and smite his companion across the shoulder until the blood spurt again . even as the three wayfarer stare , however , there be a sudden change , for the small man , have finish his song , loosen his own gown and hand the scourge to the other , who take up the stave once more and lash his companion with all the strength of his bare and sinewy arm . so , alternately beat and beat , they make their dolorous way through the beautiful wood and under the amber arch of the fading , where the calm strength and majesty of might serve to rebuke the foolish energy and misspend of mankind . such a spectacle be new to or to ; but the archer treat it lightly , as a common matter enough . " these be the , otherwise call the , " quoth he . " i marvel that should have come upon none of them before , for across the water they be as common as . i have hear that there be no english among them , but that they be from , and . en avant , ! that we may have speech with them . " as they come up to them , could hear the doleful dirge which the beater be chant , bring down his heavy whip at the end of each line , while the groan of the sufferer form a sort of dismal chorus . it be in old french , and run somewhat in this way : or avant , entre nous no fort grant misere et mort qui en la gent et a tort chair , et au nom de plus fort . then at the end of the verse the scourge change hand and the chant begin anew . " truly , holy father , " say the archer in french as they come abreast of them , " you have beat enough for . the road be all spot like a shambles at . why should mishandle thus ? " " pour , " they drone , look at the traveller with sad lack-lustre eye , and then bent to their bloody work once more without heed to the prayer and persuasion which be address to them . find all remonstrance useless , the three comrade hasten on their way , leave these strange traveller to their dreary task . " ! " cry the bowman , " there be a bucketful or more of my blood over in , but it be all spill in hot fight , and i should think twice before i draw it drop by drop as these friar be do . by my hilt ! our young one here be as white as a cheese . what be amiss then , ? " " it be nothing , " answer . " my life have be too quiet , i be not use to such sight . " " ! " the other cry , " i have never yet see a man who be so stout of speech and yet so weak of heart . " " not so , friend , " quoth big ; " it be not weakness of heart for i know the lad well . his heart be as good as thine or mine but he have more in his pate than ever you will carry under that tin pot of thine , and as a consequence he can see farther into thing , so that they weigh upon him more . " " surely to any man it be a sad sight , " say , " to see these holy man , who have do no sin themselves , suffer so for the sin of other . saint be they , if in this age any may merit so high a name . " " i count them not a fly , " cry ; " for who be the good for all their whip and yowl ? they be like other friar , i trow , when all be do . let them leave their back alone , and beat the pride out of their heart . " " by the three king ! there be sooth in what you say , " remark the archer . " besides , methinks if i be le , it would bring me little joy to see a poor devil cut the flesh off his bone ; and i should think that he have but a small opinion of me , that he should hope to please me by such work . no , by my hilt ! i should look with a more loving eye upon a jolly archer who never harm a fall foe and never fear a hale one . " " doubtless you mean no sin , " say . " if your word be wild , it be not for me to judge them . can you not see that there be other foe in this world besides frenchman , and as much glory to be gain in conquer them ? would it not be a proud day for knight or squire if he could overthrow seven adversary in the list ? yet here be we in the list of life , and there come the seven black champion against us , , , , , , and . let a man lie those seven low , and he shall have the prise of the day , from the hand of the fair queen of beauty , even from the herself . it be for this that these man mortify their flesh , and to set us an example , who would pamper ourselves overmuch . i say again that they be 's own saint , and i bow my head to them . " " and so you shall , petit , " reply the archer . " i have not hear a man speak well since old die , who be at one time chaplain to the . he be a very valiant man , but at the battle of he be through the body by a man-at-arms . for this we have an excommunication read against the man , when next we see our holy father at ; but as we have not his name , and know nothing of him , save that he ride a , i have fear sometimes that the blight may have settle upon the wrong man . " " your company have be , then , to bow knee before our holy father , the , the prop and centre of ? " ask , much interested . " perchance you have yourself set eye upon his august face ? " " twice i see him , " say the archer . " he be a lean little rat of a man , with a scab on his chin . the first time we have five thousand crown out of him , though he make much ado about it . the second time we ask ten thousand , but it be three day before we could come to term , and i be of opinion myself that we might have do well by plunder the palace . his chamberlain and cardinal come forth , as i remember , to ask whether we would take seven thousand crown with his blessing and a plenary absolution , or the ten thousand with his solemn ban by bell , book and candle . we be all of one mind that it be well to have the ten thousand with the curse ; but in some way they prevail upon , so that we be bless and shrive against our will . perchance it be as well , for the company be in need of it about that time . " the pious be deeply shock by this reminiscence . involuntarily he glance up and around to see if there be any trace of those opportune and thunderbolt which , in the " , " be wont so often to cut short the loose talk of the scoffer . the autumn sun stream down as brightly as ever , and the peaceful red path still wind in front of them through the rustle , forest , seem to be too busy with her own concern to heed the dignity of an outraged pontiff . yet he feel a sense of weight and reproach within his breast , as though he have sin himself in give ear to such word . the teaching of twenty year cry out against such license . it be not until he have throw himself down before one of the many wayside crosse , and have pray from his heart both for the archer and for himself , that the dark cloud roll back again from his spirit . his companion have pass on whilst he be at his orison ; but his young blood and the fresh morning air both invite him to a scamper . his staff in one hand and his scrip in the other , with springy step and floating lock , he race along the forest path , as active and as graceful as a young deer . he have not far to go , however ; for , on turn a corner , he come on a roadside cottage with a wooden around it , where stand big and the bowman , stare at something within . as he come up with them , he see that two little lad , the one about nine year of age and the other somewhat old , be stand on the plot in front of the cottage , each holding out a round stick in their left hand , with their arm stiff and straight from the shoulder , as silent and still as two small statue . they be pretty , blue-eyed , lad , well make and sturdy , with bronze skin , which speak of a woodland life . " here be young chip from an old bow stave ! " cry the soldier in great delight . " this be the proper way to raise child . by my hilt ! i could not have train them good have i the order of it myself . " " what be it then ? " ask . " they stand very stiff , and i trust that they have not be strike so . " " nay , they be train their left arm , that they may have a steady grasp of the bow . so my own father train me , and six day a week i hold out his till my arm be heavy as lead . , mes enfants ! how long will you hold out ? " " until the sun be over the great lime-tree , good master , " the elder answer . " what would be , then ? woodman ? verderer ? " " nay , soldier , " they cry both together . " by the beard of my father ! but be whelp of the true breed . why so keen , then , to be soldier ? " " that we may fight the scot , " they answer . " daddy will send us to fight the scot . " " and why the scot , my pretty lad ? we have see french and spanish galley no further away than , but i doubt that it will be some time before the scot find their way to these part . " " our business be with the scot , " quoth the elder ; " for it be the scot who cut off daddy 's string finger and his thumb . " " aye , lad , it be that , " say a deep voice from behind 's shoulder . look round , the wayfarer see a gaunt , big-boned man , with sunken cheek and a sallow face , who have come up behind them . he hold up his two hand as he speak , and show that the thumb and two first finger have be tear away from each of them . " , ! " cry . " who have serve in so shameful a fashion ? " " it be easy to see , friend , that you be bear far from the march of , " quoth the stranger , with a bitter smile . " of there be no man who would not know the handiwork of , the black . " " and how fall you into his hand ? " ask . " i be a man of the north country , from the town of and the wapentake of , " he answer . " there be a day when , from to , there be no good marksman than . yet , as you see , he have leave me , as he have leave many another poor border archer , with no grip for bill or bow . yet the king have give me a living here in the , and please these two lad of mine will pay off a debt that have be owe over long . what be the price of daddy 's thumb , boy ? " " twenty scottish life , " they answer together . " and for the finger ? " " half a score . " " when they can bend my , and bring down a squirrel at a hundred pace , i send them to take service under , the of the and of . by my soul ! i would give the rest of my finger to see the within of them . " " may you live to see it , " quoth the bowman . " and hark , mes enfants , take an old soldier 's rede and lay your body to the bow , draw from hip and thigh as much as from arm . learn also , i pray you , to shoot with a drop shaft ; for though a bowman may at time be call upon to shoot straight and fast , yet it be more often that he have to do with a behind a wall , or an with his mantlet raise when you can hope to do him scathe unless your shaft fall straight upon him from the cloud . i have not draw string for two week , but i may be able to show how such shot should be make . " he loosen his , sling his quiver round to the front , and then glance keenly round for a fitting mark . there be a yellow and wither stump some way off , see under the droop branch of a lofty oak . the archer measure the distance with his eye ; and then , draw three shaft , he shoot them off with such speed that the first have not reach the mark ere the last be on the string . each arrow pass high over the oak ; and , of the three , two stick fair into the stump ; while the third , catch in some wander puff of wind , be drive a foot or two to one side . " good ! " cry the north countryman . " hearken to him lad ! he be a master bowman . your dad say amen to every word he say . " " by my hilt ! " say , " if i be to preach on , the whole long day would scarce give me time for my sermon . we have marksman in the company who will notch with a shaft every crevice and joint of a 's harness , from the clasp of his bassinet to the hinge of his greave . but , with your favor , friend , i must gather my arrow again , for while a shaft cost a penny a poor man can scarce leave them stick in wayside stump . we must , then , on our road again , and i hope from my heart that you may train these two young goshawk here until they be ready for a cast even at such a quarry as you speak of . " leave the thumbless archer and his brood , the wayfarer strike through the scattered hut of , and out on to the broad rolling heath cover deep in fern and in heather , where drove of the black forest pig be root about amongst the hillock . the wood about this point fall away to the left and the right , while the road curve upwards and the wind sweep keenly over the swell upland . the broad strip of bracken glow red and yellow against the black peaty soil , and a queenly doe who graze among them turn her white front and her great questioning eye towards the wayfarer . gaze in admiration at the supple beauty of the creature ; but the archer 's finger play with his quiver , and his eye glisten with the fell instinct which urge a man to slaughter . " ! " he growl , " be this , or even , we should have a fresh haunch for our . law or no law , i have a mind to loose a bolt at her . " " i would break your stave across my knee first , " cry , lay his great hand upon the bow . " what ! man , i be , and i know what come of it . in our own township of two have lose their eye and one his skin for this very thing . on my troth , i feel no great love when i first see you , but since then i have conceive over much regard for you to wish to see the verderer 's flayer at work upon you . " " it be my trade to risk my skin , " growl the archer ; but none the less he thrust his quiver over his hip again and turn his face for the west . as they advance , the path still tend upwards , run from heath into copse of holly and yew , and so back into heath again . it be joyful to hear the merry whistle of blackbird as they dart from one clump of greenery to the other . now and again a peaty amber colored stream ripple across their way , with ferny bank , where the blue kingfisher flit busily from side to side , or the gray and pensive heron , swell with trout and dignity , stand among the sedge . chatter jay and loud flap thickly overhead , while ever and anon the measure tap of 's carpenter , the great green woodpecker , sound from each wayside grove . on either side , as the path mount , the long sweep of country broaden and expand , slope down on the one side through yellow forest and brown moor to the distant smoke of and the blue misty channel which lie alongside the , while to the north the wood roll away , grove top grove , to where in the furthest distance the white spire of stand out hard and clear against the cloudless sky . to whose day have be spend in the low-lying , the eager upland air and the wide free give a sense of life and of the joy of living which make his young blood tingle in his vein . even the heavy be not unmoved by the beauty of their road , while the bowman whistle lustily or sing snatch of french love song in a voice which might have scare the most stout-hearted maiden that ever hearken to serenade . " i have a liking for that north countryman , " he remark presently . " he have good power of hatred . see by his cheek and eye that he be as bitter as verjuice . i warm to a man who have some gall in his liver . " " ah me ! " sigh . " would it not be good if he have some love in his heart ? " " i would not say nay to that . by my hilt ! i shall never be say to be traitor to the little king . let a man love the sex . ! they be make to be love , les , from down to ! i be right glad , garcon , to see that the good monk have train so wisely and so well . " " nay , i mean not worldly love , but rather that his heart should soften towards those who have wrong him . " the archer shake his head . " a man should love those of his own breed , " say he . " but it be not nature that an english-born man should love a or a frenchman . ! you have not see a drove of raider on their nag , or you would not speak of love them . i would as soon take himself to my arm . i fear , gar . , that they have teach but badly at , for surely a bishop know more of what be right and what be ill than an abbot can do , and i myself with these very eye see the of hew into a scottish with a battle-axe , which be a pass strange way of show him that he love him . " scarce see his way to argue in the face of so decide an opinion on the part of a high dignitary of the . " you have bear arm against the scot , then ? " he ask . " why , man , i first loose string in battle when i be but a lad , young by two year than you , at 's , under the . later , i serve under the of , that very of whom our friend speak , the same who hold the king of scot to ransom . ! it be rough soldier , and a good school for one who would learn to be hardy and . " " i have hear that the scot be good man of war , " say . " for and for spearman i have not see their match , " the archer answer . " they can travel , too , with bag of meal and gridiron sling to their , so that it be ill to follow them . there be scant crop and few beef in the borderland , where a man must reap his grain with sickle in one fist and brown bill in the other . on the other hand , they be the sorry archer that i have ever see , and can so much as aim with the arbalest , to say nought of the . again , they be mostly poor folk , even the noble among them , so that there be few who can buy as good a brigandine of chain-mail as that which i be wear , and it be ill for them to stand up against our own knight , who carry the price of five scotch farm upon their chest and shoulder . man for man , with equal weapon , they be as worthy and valiant man as could be find in the whole of . " " and the french ? " ask , to whom the archer 's light gossip have all the relish that the word of the man of action have for the recluse . " the french be also very worthy man . we have have great good fortune in , and it have lead to much and camp-fire talk , but i have ever notice that those who know the most have the least to say about it . i have see frenchman fight both in open field , in the and the defend of town or , in , camisade , night foray , , sally , outfall , and knightly . their knight and squire , lad , be every whit as good as ours , and i could pick out a score of those who ride behind who would hold the list with sharpen lance against the good man in the army of . on the other hand , their common folk be so crush down with gabelle , and poll-tax , and every manner of cursed tallage , that the spirit have pass right out of them . it be a fool 's plan to teach a man to be a cur in peace , and think that he will be a lion in war . fleece them like sheep and sheep they will remain . if the noble have not conquer the poor folk it be like enough that we should not have conquer the noble . " " but they must be sorry folk to bow down to the rich in such a fashion , " say big . " i be but a poor commoner of myself , and yet i know something of charter , liberty , franchise , usage , privilege , custom , and the like . if these be break , then all man know that it be time to buy . " " , but the man of the law be strong in as well as the man of war . by my hilt ! i hold that a man have more to fear there from the ink-pot of the one than from the iron of the other . there be ever some cursed sheepskin in their strong box to prove that the rich man should be rich and the poor man poorer . it would scarce pass in , but they be quiet folk over the water . " " and what other nation have you see in your travel , good sir ? " ask . his young mind hunger for plain fact of life , after the long course of speculation and of mysticism on which he have be train . " i have see the low countryman in arm , and i have nought to say against him . heavy and slow be he by nature , and be not to be bring into battle for the sake of a lady 's eyelash or the twang of a minstrel 's string , like the hot blood of the south . but ma ! lay hand on his , or trifle with his velvet of , and out buzz every stout burgher , like bee from the , ready to lay on as though it be his one business in life . by our lady ! they have show the french at and elsewhere that they be as deft in wield steel as in weld it . " " and the man of ? " " they too be very hardy soldier , the more so as for many hundred year they have have to fight hard against the cursed follower of the black , who have press upon them from the south , and still , as i understand , hold the fair half of the country . i have a turn with them upon the sea when they come over to and the good queen with her lady sit upon the cliff look down at us , as if it have be joust or tourney . by my hilt ! it be a sight that be worth the see , for all that be well in be out on the water that day . we go forth in little ship and come back in great of fifty tall ship of , over two score fly the of ere the sun have set . but now , youngster , i have answer you freely , and i trow it be time that you answer me . let thing be plat and plain between us . i be a man who shoot straight at his mark . you see the thing i have with me at yonder hostel : name which you will , save only the box of rose-colored sugar which i take to the , and you shall have it if you will but come with me to . " " , " say , " i would gladly come with to or where else will , just to list to your talk , and because be the only two friend that i have in the whole wide world outside of the cloister ; but , indeed , it may not be , for my duty be towards my brother , see that father and mother be dead , and he my elder . besides , when talk of take me to , do not conceive how useless i should be to you , see that neither by training nor by nature be i fit for the war , and there seem to be nought but strife in those part . " " that come from my fool 's talk , " cry the archer ; " for be a man of no learn myself , my tongue turn to blade and target , even as my hand do . know then that for every parchment in there be twenty in . for every statue , cut gem , shrine , carve screen , or what else might please the eye of a learn clerk , there be a good hundred to our one . at the spoil of i have see chamber store with writing , though not one man in our company could read them . again , in and , and other town that i could name , there be the great arch and fortalice still standing which be build of old by giant man who come from the south . can i not see by your brighten eye how you would love to look upon these thing ? come then with me , and , by these ten ! there be not one of them which you shall not see . " " i should indeed love to look upon them , " answer ; " but i have come from for a purpose , and i must be true to my service , even as thou art true to thine . " " bethink you again , ami , " quoth , " that you might do much good yonder , since there be three hundred man in the company , and none who have ever a word of grace for them , and yet the know that there be never a set of man who be in more need of it . the one duty may balance the other . your brother have do without you this many a year , and , as i gather , he have never walk as far as to see you during all that time , so he can be in any great need of you . " " besides , " say , " the of be a through the forest , from to . he be a drunken , brawl , perilous churl , as you may find to your cost . " " the more reason that i should strive to mend him , " quoth . " there be no need to urge me , friend , for my own wish would draw me to , and it would be a joy to me if i could go with you . but indeed and indeed it can be , so here i take my leave of you , for yonder square tower amongst the tree upon the right must surely be the church of , and i may reach it by this path through the wood . " " well , be with , lad ! " cry the archer , press to his heart . " i be quick to love , and quick to hate ' fore i be loth to part . " " would it not be well , " say , " that we should wait here , and see what manner of greet you have from your brother . you may prove to be as welcome as the king 's purveyor to the village dame . " " , nay , " he answer ; " must not bide for me , for where i go i stay . " " yet it may be as well that you should know whither we go , " say the archer . " we shall now journey south through the wood until we come out upon the road , and so onwards , hope to reach the castle of , of , of which be constable . there we shall bide , and it be like enough that for a month or more you may find us there , ere we be ready for our back to . " it be hard indeed for to break away from these two new but hearty friend , and so strong be the combat between his conscience and his inclination that he dare not look round , lest his resolution should slip away from him . it be not until he be deep among the tree trunk that he cast a glance backwards , when he find that he could still see them through the branch on the road above him . the archer be stand with fold arm , his bow jut from over his shoulder , and the sun gleam brightly upon his and the link of his chain-mail . beside him stand his giant recruit , still clad in the and ill-fitting garment of the fuller of , with arm and leg shoot out of his scanty garb . even as watch them they turn upon their heel and plod off together upon their way . the path which the young clerk have now to follow lay through a magnificent forest of the very heavy timber , where the giant bowl of oak and of beech form long aisle in every direction , shoot up their huge branch to build the majestic arch of 's own cathedral . beneath lay a broad carpet of the soft and green moss , fleck over with fall leave , but yield pleasantly to the foot of the traveller . the track which guide him be one so seldom use that in place it lose itself entirely among the grass , to reappear as a reddish rut between the distant tree trunk . it be very still here in the heart of the woodland . the gentle rustle of the branch and the distant coo of pigeon be the only sound which break in upon the silence , save that once hear afar off a merry call upon a hunting bugle and the shrill yap of the hound . it be not without some emotion that he look upon the scene around him , for , in spite of his secluded life , he know enough of the ancient greatness of his own family to be aware that the time have be when they have hold undisputed and paramount sway over all that tract of country . his father could trace his pure saxon lineage back to that who have hold the manor of and of at the time when the first set mail foot upon english soil . the afforestation of the district , however , and its conversion into a royal demesne have clip off a large section of his estate , while other part have be confiscate as a punishment for his suppose complicity in an abortive saxon rising . the fate of the ancestor have be typical of that of his descendant . during three hundred year their domain have gradually contract , sometimes through royal or feudal encroachment , and sometimes through such gift to the church as that with which 's father have open the door of to his young son . the importance of the family have thus dwindle , but they still retain the old saxon manor-house , with a couple of farm and a grove large enough to afford pannage to a hundred centum , " as the old family parchment describe it . above all , the owner of the soil could still hold his head high as the veritable of be , as hold the land in free socage , with no feudal superior , and answerable to no man lower than the king . know this , feel some little glow of worldly pride as he look for the first time upon the land with which so many generation of his ancestor have be associate . he push on the quick , twirl his staff merrily , and look out at every turn of the path for some sign of the old saxon residence . he be suddenly arrest , however , by the appearance of a fellow arm with a club , who spring out from behind a tree and bar his passage . he be a rough , powerful peasant , with cap and tunic of sheepskin , leather breech , and galligaskins round leg and foot . " stand ! " he shout , raise his heavy cudgel to enforce the order . " who be you who walk so freely through the wood ? whither would you go , and what be your errand ? " " why should i answer your question , my friend ? " say , standing on his guard . " because your tongue may save your pate . but where have i look upon your face before ? " " no longer ago than last night at ' , ' " the clerk answer , recognize the escape serf who have be so outspoken as to his wrong . " by the ! yes . you be the little clerk who sit so mum in the corner , and then cry on the gleeman . what in the scrip ? " " naught of any price . " " how can i tell that , clerk ? let me see . " " not i. " " ! i could pull you limb from limb like a pullet . what would you have ? forget that we be alone far from all man ? how can your clerkship help you ? wouldst lose scrip and life too ? " " i will part with neither without fight . " " a fight , ? a fight betwixt spur cock and new hatch chicken ! fight day may soon be over . " " ask me in the name of charity i would have give freely , " cry . " as it stand , not one farthing shall you have with my free will , and when i see my brother , the of , he will raise hue and cry from to , from hundred to hundred , until you be take as a common robber and a scourge to the country . " the outlaw sink his club . " the 's brother ! " he gasp . " now , by the key of ! i have rather that hand wither and tongue be palsied ere i have strike or miscall you . if you be the 's brother you be one of the right side , i warrant , for all your clerkly dress . " " his brother i be , " say . " but if i be not , be that reason why you should molest me on the king 's ground ? " " i give not the pip of an apple for king or for noble , " cry the serf passionately . " ill have i have from them , and ill i shall repay them . i be a good friend to my friend , and , by the ! an evil foeman to my foe . " " and therefore the bad of foeman to , " say . " but i pray you , since you seem to know him , to point out to me the short path to my brother 's house . " the serf be about to reply , when the clear ringing call of a bugle burst from the wood close behind them , and catch sight for an instant of the dun side and white breast of a lordly stag glance swiftly betwixt the distant tree trunk . a minute later come the shaggy , a dozen or fourteen of them , run on a hot scent , with nose to earth and tail in air . as they stream past the silent forest around break suddenly into loud life , with gallop of hoof , crackle of brushwood , and the short , sharp cry of the hunter . close behind the pack ride a and a , whoop on the laggard and encourage the leader , in the shrill jargon which be the language of venery and woodcraft . be still gaze after them , listen to the loud " ! ! ! " with which they call upon their favorite hound , when a group of horseman crash out through the underwood at the very spot where the serf and he be stand . the one who lead be a man between fifty and sixty year of age , and weather-beaten , with a broad , thoughtful forehead and eye which shine brightly from under his fierce and overhang brow . his beard , streak thickly with gray , bristle forward from his chin , and speak of a passionate nature , while the long , finely cut face and firm mouth mark the leader of man . his figure be erect and soldierly , and he ride his horse with the careless grace of a man whose life have be spend in the saddle . in common garb , his masterful face and flash eye would have mark him as one who be bear to rule ; but now , with his silken tunic powder with golden fleur-de-lis , his velvet mantle line with the royal , and the lion of stamp in silver upon his harness , none could fail to recognize the noble , most warlike and powerful of all the long line of fight monarch who have rule the anglo-norman race . doff hat and bow head at the sight of him , but the serf fold his hand and lean them upon his cudgel , look with little love at the knot of noble and who ride behind the king . " ! " cry , rein up for an instant his powerful black steed . " passe ? non ? , ; . " " the deer , clown ? " say a , man , who ride at the king 's elbow . " if have head it back it be as much as your ear be worth . " " it pass by the blight beech there , " say , point , " and the hound be hard at its heel . " " it be well , " cry , still speak in french : for , though he could understand english , he have never learn to express himself in so barbarous and unpolished a tongue . " by my faith , sir , " he continue , half turning in his saddle to address his escort , " unless my woodcraft be sadly at fault , it be a stag of six tine and the fine that we have rouse this journey . a golden to the man who be the first to sound the mort . " he shake his bridle as he speak , and thunder away , his knight lie low upon their horse and gallop as hard as whip and spur would drive them , in the hope of win the king 's prise . away they drive down the long green horse , black and gray , rider clad in every shade of velvet , fur , or silk , with glint of brazen horn and flash of knife and spear . one only linger , the , who , make a which bring him within of the serf , slash him across the face with his . " doff , dog , doff , " he hiss , " when a monarch deign to lower his eye to such as you ! " -- spur through the underwood and be go , with a gleam of steel shoe and flutter of dead leave . the villein take the cruel blow without wince or cry , as one to whom stripe be a birthright and an inheritance . his eye flash , however , and he shake his bony hand with a fierce wild gesture after the retreat figure . " black hound of , " he mutter , " evil the day that you and those like you set foot in free ! i know kennel of . the night will come when i may do to and thine what you and your class have wrought upon mine and me . smite me if i fail to smite , thou french robber , with wife and child and all that be under castle roof ! " " forbear ! " cry . " mix not 's name with these unhallowed threat ! and yet it be a coward 's blow , and one to stir the blood and loose the tongue of the most peaceful . let me find some soothing simple and lay them on the weal to draw the sting . " " nay , there be but one thing that can draw the sting , and that the future may bring to me . but , clerk , if you would see your brother you must on , for there be a meeting , and his merry man will await him ere the shadow turn from west to east . i pray you not to hold him back , for it would be an evil thing if all the stout lad be there and the leader . i would come with you , but sooth to say i be station here and may not move . the path over yonder , betwixt the oak and the thorn , should bring you out into his nether field . " lose no time in follow the direction of the wild , masterless man , whom he leave among the tree where he have find him . his heart be the heavy for the encounter , not only because all bitterness and wrath be abhorrent to his gentle nature , but also because it disturb him to hear his brother speak of as though he be a chief of outlaw or the leader of a party against the state . indeed , of all the thing which he have see yet in the world to surprise him there be none more strange than the hate which class appear to bear to class . the talk of laborer , woodman and villein in the inn have all point to the mutiny , and now his brother 's name be speak as though he be the very centre of the universal discontent . in good truth , the commons throughout the length and breadth of the land be of this fine game of chivalry which have be play so long at their expense . so long as knight and baron be a strength and a guard to the kingdom they might be endure , but now , when all man know that the great battle in have be win by english yeoman and welsh stabber , warlike fame , the only fame to which his class have ever aspire , appear to have desert the horseman . the sport of the list have do much in day go by to impress the mind of the people , but the plume and unwieldy champion be no longer an object either of fear or of reverence to man whose father and brother have shoot into the press at or , and see the proud chivalry in the world unable to make head against the weapon of disciplined peasant . have change hand . the protector have become the protect , and the whole fabric of the feudal system be totter to a fall . hence the fierce muttering of the low class and the constant discontent , break out into local tumult and outrage , and culminate some year later in the great rising of . what see and wonder at in would have appeal equally to the traveller in any other english county from the to the march of . he be follow the track , his misgiving increase with every step which take him near to that home which he have never see , when of a sudden the tree begin to thin and the sward to spread out onto a broad , green lawn , where five cow lie in the sunshine and drove of black swine wander unchecked . a brown forest stream swirl down the centre of this clearing , with a rude bridge fling across it , and on the other side be a second field slope up to a long , low-lying wooden house , with thatch roof and open square for window . gaze across at it with flush cheek and sparkling this , he know , must be the home of his father . a wreath of blue smoke float up through a hole in the thatch , and be the only sign of life in the place , save a great black hound which lie sleeping chain to the door-post . in the yellow shimmer of the autumn sunshine it lie as peacefully and as still as he have oft picture it to himself in his dream . he be rouse , however , from his pleasant reverie by the sound of voice , and two people emerge from the forest some little way to his right and move across the field in the direction of the bridge . the one be a man with yellow flowing beard and very long hair of the same tint droop over his shoulder ; his dress of good cloth and his assured bearing mark him as a man of position , while the sombre hue of his clothes and the absence of all ornament contrast with the flash and glitter which have mark the king 's retinue . by his side walk a woman , tall and slight and dark , with lithe , graceful figure and clear-cut , composed feature . her jet-black hair be gather back under a light pink coif , her head poise proudly upon her neck , and her step long and springy , like that of some wild , tireless woodland creature . she hold her leave hand in front of her , cover with a red velvet glove , and on the wrist a little brown falcon , very fluffy and bedraggled , which she smooth and fondle as she walk . as she come out into the sunshine , notice that her light gown , slash with pink , be all stain with earth and with moss upon one side from shoulder to hem . he stand in the shadow of an oak stare at her with parted lip , for this woman seem to him to be the most beautiful and graceful creature that mind could conceive of . such have he imagine the angel , and such he have try to paint them in the missal ; but here there be something human , be it only in the battered hawk and discolor dress , which send a tingle and thrill through his nerve such as no dream of radiant and stainless spirit have ever yet be able to conjure up . good , quiet , mother nature , long slight and miscall , still bide her time and draw to her bosom the most errant of her child . the two walk swiftly across the meadow to the narrow bridge , he in front and she a pace or two behind . there they pause , and stand for a few minute face to face talk earnestly . have read and have hear of love and of lover . such be these , man and the fair damsel with the cold , proud face . why else should they wander together in the wood , or be so lose in talk by rustic stream ? and yet as he watch , uncertain whether to advance from the cover or to choose some other path to the house , he soon come to doubt the truth of this first conjecture . the man stand , tall and square , block the entrance to the bridge , and throw out his hand as he speak in a wild eager fashion , while the deep tone of his stormy voice rise at time into accent of menace and of anger . she stand fearlessly in front of him , still stroke her bird ; but twice she throw a swift questioning glance over her shoulder , as one who be in search of aid . so move be the young clerk by these mute appeal , that he come forth from the tree and cross the meadow , uncertain what to do , and yet loth to hold back from one who might need his aid . so intent be they upon each other that neither take note of his approach ; until , when he be close upon them , the man throw his arm roughly round the damsel 's waist and draw her towards him , she strain her lithe , supple figure away and strike fiercely at him , while the hooded hawk scream with ruffle wing and peck blindly in its mistress 's defence . bird and maid , however , have but little chance against their assailant who , laugh loudly , catch her wrist in one hand while he draw her towards him with the other . " the good rose have ever the long thorn , " say he . " quiet , little one , or you may do yourself a hurt . must pay saxon toll on saxon land , my proud , for all your air and grace . " " you boor ! " she hiss . " you base underbred clod ! be this your care and your hospitality ? i would rather wed a brand serf from my father 's field . leave go , i ! good youth , have send you . make him loose me ! by the honor of your mother , i pray you to stand by me and to make this knave loose me . " " stand by you i will , and that blithely , " say . " surely , sir , you should take shame to hold the damsel against her will . " the man turn a face upon him which be in its strength and in its wrath . with his tangle of golden hair , his fierce blue eye , and his large , well-marked feature , he be the most comely man whom have ever see , and yet there be something so sinister and so fall in his expression that child or beast might well have shrink from him . his brow be draw , his cheek flush , and there be a mad sparkle in his eye which speak of a wild , nature . " young fool ! " he cry , hold the woman still to his side , though every line of her shrink figure speak her abhorrence . " do you keep your spoon in your own broth . i rede you to go on your way , lest worse befall you . this little wench have come with me and with me she shall bide . " " liar ! " cry the woman ; and , stoop her head , she suddenly bite fiercely into the broad brown hand which hold her . he whip it back with an oath , while she tear herself free and slip behind , cower up against him like the tremble leveret who see the falcon poise for the swoop above him . " stand off my land ! " the man say fiercely , heedless of the blood which trickle freely from his finger . " what have you to do here ? by your dress you should be one of those cursed clerk who overrun the land like vile rat , poke and pry into other man 's concern , too caitiff to fight and too lazy to work . by the rood ! if i have my will upon , i should nail you upon the abbey door , as they hang vermin before their hole . art neither man nor woman , young shaveling . get back to fellow ere i lie hand upon you : for your foot be on my land , and i may slay you as a common . " " be this your land , then ? " gasp . " would you dispute it , dog ? would you wish by trick or quibble to juggle me out of these last acre ? know , knave , that you have dare this day to stand in the path of one whose race have be the adviser of king and the leader of host , ere ever this vile crew of robber come into the land , or such half-blood hound as you be let loose to preach that the thief should have his booty and the honest man should sin if he strive to win back his own . " " you be the of ? " " that be i ; and the son of the , of the pure blood of the thane , by the only daughter of the house of , whose forefather hold the banner at the fatal fight where our shield be break and our sword shiver . i tell you , clerk , that my folk hold this land from to the road ; and , by the soul of my father ! it will be a strange thing if i be to be bearded upon the little that be leave of it . , i say , and meddle not with my affair . " " if you leave me now , " whisper the woman , " then shame forever upon your manhood . " " surely , sir , " say , speak in as persuasive and soothe a way as he could , " if your birth be gentle , there be the more reason that your manner should be gentle too . i be well persuade that you do but jest with this lady , and that you will now permit her to leave your land either alone or with me as a guide , if she should need one , through the wood . as to birth , it do not become me to boast , and there be sooth in what you say as to the unworthiness of clerk , but it be none the less true that i be as well bear as you . " " dog ! " cry the furious , " there be no man in the south who can say as much . " " yet can i , " say smile ; " for indeed i also be the son of the , of the pure blood of the thane , by the only daughter of of . surely , dear brother , " he continue , hold out his hand , " you have a warm greeting than this for me . there be but two bough leave upon this old , old saxon trunk . " his elder brother dash his hand aside with an oath , while an expression of malignant hatred pass over his feature . " you be the young cub of , then , " say he . " i might have know it by the sleek face and the slavish manner too and craven in spirit to answer back a rough word . father , shaveling , with all his fault , have a man 's heart ; and there be few who could look him in the eye on the day of his anger . but you ! look there , rat , on yonder field where the cow graze , and on that other beyond , and on the orchard hard by the church . do you know that all these be squeeze out of your die father by greedy priest , to pay for your upbringing in the cloister ? i , the , be shear of my land that you may snivel latin and eat bread for which you never do hand 's turn . you rob me first , and now you would come preach and whine , in search mayhap of another field or two for your priestly friend . knave ! my dog shall be set upon you ; but , meanwhile , stand out of my path , and stop me at your peril ! " as he speak he rush forward , and , throw the lad to one side , catch the woman 's wrist . , however , as active as a young , spring to her aid and seize her by the other arm , raise his staff as he do so . " you may say what you will to me , " he say between his clench may be no good than i deserve ; but , brother or no , i swear by my hope of salvation that i will break your arm if you do not leave hold of the maid . " there be a ring in his voice and a flash in his eye which promise that the blow would follow quick at the heel of the word . for a moment the blood of the long line of hot-headed thane be too strong for the soft of the doctrine of meekness and mercy . he be conscious of a fierce wild thrill through his nerve and a throb of mad gladness at his heart , as his real human self burst for an instant the bond of custom and of teaching which have hold it so long . the socman spring back , look to left and to right for some stick or stone which might serve him for weapon ; but find none , he turn and run at the top of his speed for the house , blow the while upon a shrill whistle . " come ! " gasp the woman . " fly , friend , ere he come back . " " , let him come ! " cry . " i shall not budge a foot for him or his dog . " " come , come ! " she cry , tug at his arm . " i know the man : he will kill you . come , for the 's sake , or for my sake , for i can go and leave you here . " " come , then , " say he ; and they run together to the cover of the wood . as they gain the edge of the brushwood , , look back , see his brother come run out of the house again , with the sun gleam upon his hair and his beard . he hold something which flash in his right hand , and he stoop at the threshold to unloose the black hound . " this way ! " the woman whisper , in a low eager voice . " through the bush to that forked ash . do not heed me ; i can run as fast as you , i trow . now into the in , over ankle , to throw the dog off , though i think it be but a common cur , like its master . " as she speak , she spring herself into the shallow stream and run swiftly up the centre of it , with the brown water bubble over her foot and her hand toward the cling branch of bramble or sapling . follow close at her heel , with his mind in a whirl at this black welcome and sudden shift of all his plan and hope . yet , grave as be his thought , they would still turn to wonder as he look at the twinkle foot of his guide and see her lithe figure bend this way and that , dip under bough , spring over stone , with a lightness and ease which make it no small task for him to keep up with her . at last , when he be almost out of breath , she suddenly throw herself down upon a mossy bank , between two , and look ruefully at her own drip foot and bedraggled skirt . " ! " say she , " what shall i do ? will keep me to my chamber for a month , and make me work at the tapestry of the nine bold knight . she promise as much last week , when i fall into bog , and yet she know that i can abide . " , still stand in the stream , glance down at the graceful pink-and-white figure , the curve of hair , and the proud , sensitive face which look up frankly and confidingly at his own . " we have well on , " he say . " he may yet overtake us . " " not so . we be well off his land now , nor can he tell in this great wood which way we have take . but have him at your mercy . why do you not kill him ? " " kill him ! my brother ! " " and why not ? " -- a quick gleam of her white tooth . " he would have kill you . i know him , and i read it in his eye . have i have your staff i would have , and do it , too . " she shake her clench white hand as she speak , and her lip tighten ominously . " i be already sad in heart for what i have do , " say he , sit down on the bank , and sink his face into his hand . " help me ! -- that be bad in me seem to come uppermost . another instant , and i have smite him : the son of my own mother , the man whom i have long to take to my heart . alas ! that i should still be so weak . " " weak ! " she exclaim , raise her black eyebrow . " i do not think that even my father himself , who be a hard judge of manhood , would call you that . but it be , as you may think , sir , a very pleasant thing for me to hear that you be grieve at what you have do , and i can but rede that we should go back together , and you should make your peace with the by hand back your prisoner . it be a sad thing that so small a thing as a woman should come between two who be of one blood . " simple open his eye at this little spurt of feminine bitterness . " nay , lady , " say he , " that be worst of all . what man would be so caitiff and thrall as to fail you at your need ? i have turn my brother against me , and now , alas ! i appear to have give you offence also with my clumsy tongue . but , indeed , lady , i be tear both way , and can scarce grasp in my mind what it be that have befall . " " nor can i marvel at that , " say she , with a little tinkling laugh . " you come in as the knight do in the jongleur 's romance , between dragon and damsel , with small time for the asking of question . come , " she go on , spring to her foot , and smooth down her rumple frock , " let us walk through the shaw together , and we may come upon with the horse . if poor have not cast a shoe , we should not have have this trouble . nay , i must have your arm : for , though i speak lightly , now that all be happily over i be as frighten as my brave . see how his chest heave , and his dear feather all little knight who would not have his lady mishandle . " so she prattle on to her hawk , while walk by her side , steal a glance from time to time at this queenly and wayward woman . in silence they wander together over the velvet turf and on through the broad wood , where the old beech throw their circle of black shadow upon the sunlit sward . " you have no wish , then , to hear my story ? " say she , at last . " if it please you to tell it me , " he answer . " oh ! " she cry toss her head , " if it be of so little interest to you , we have well let it bide . " " , " say he eagerly , " i would fain hear it . " " you have a right to know it , if you have lose a brother 's favor through it . and well , you be , as i understand , a clerk , so i must think of you as one step further in order , and make you my . know then that this man have be a suitor for my hand , less as i think for my own sweet sake than because he have ambition and have it on his mind that he might improve his fortune by dip into my father 's strong the know that he would have find little enough therein . my father , however , be a proud man , a gallant knight and try soldier of the old blood , to whom this man 's churlish birth and low , ! i have forget that he be of the same strain as yourself . " " , trouble not for that , " say , " we be all from good mother . " " stream may spring from one source , and yet some be clear and some be foul , " quoth she quickly . " but , to be brief over the matter , my father would have none of his wooing , nor in sooth would i. on that he swear a vow against us , and as he be know to be a perilous man , with many outlaw and other at his back , my father forbid that i should hawk or hunt in any part of the wood to the north of the road . as it chance , however , this morning my little here be loose at a heron , and page and i ride on , with no thought but for the sport , until we find ourselves in wood . small harm then , but that my horse troubadour tread with a tender foot upon a sharp stick , rear and throw me to the ground . see to my gown , the third that i have befoul within the week . woe worth me when the set eye upon it ! " " and what then , lady ? " ask . " why , then away run , for belike i spur him in fall , and ride after him as hard as hoof could bear him . when i rise there be the himself by my side , with the news that i be on his land , but with so many courteous word besides , and such gallant bearing , that he prevail upon me to come to his house for shelter , there to wait until the page return . by the grace of the and the help of my patron , i stop short ere i reach his door , though , as you see , he strive to hale me up to it . and ! " -- shiver and chatter like one in an . " what be it ? " cry , look about in alarm . " nothing , friend , nothing ! i be but think how i bite into his hand . sooner would i bite live toad or poison snake . oh , i shall loathe my lip forever ! but brave you be , and how quick ! how meek for yourself , and how bold for a stranger ! if i be a man , i should wish to do what you have do . " " it be a small thing , " he answer , with a tingle of pleasure at these sweet word of praise . " but will you do ? " " there be a great oak near here , and i think that will bring the horse there , for it be an old of ours . then hey for home , and no more hawking ! a gallop will dry foot and skirt . " " but your father ? " " not one word shall i tell him . you do not know him ; but i can tell you he be not a man to disobey as i have disobey him . he would avenge me , it be true , but it be not to him that i shall look for vengeance . some day , perchance , in joust or in tourney , knight may wish to wear my color , and then i shall tell him that if he do indeed crave my favor there be wrong , and the wrong the of . so my knight shall find a venture such as bold knight love , and my debt shall be pay , and my father none the wise , and one rogue the less in the world . say , be not that a brave plan ? " " , lady , it be a thought which be unworthy of you . how can such as you speak of violence and of vengeance . be none to be gentle and kind , none to be piteous and forgiving ? alas ! it be a hard , cruel world , and i would that i have never leave my abbey cell . to hear such word from your lip be as though i hear an angel of grace preach the devil 's own creed . " she start from him as a young colt who first feel the bit . " for your rede , young sir ! " she say , with a little curtsey . " as i understand your word , you be grieve that you ever meet me , and look upon me as a preaching devil . why , my father be a bitter man when he be wroth , but have never call me such a name as that . it may be his right and duty , but certes it be none of thine . so it would be well , since you think so lowly of me , that you should take this path to the left while i keep on upon this one ; for it be clear that i can be no fit companion for you . " so say , with downcast lid and a dignity which be somewhat mar by her bedraggled skirt , she sweep off down the muddy track , leave standing stare ruefully after her . he wait in vain for some backward glance or sign of relent , but she walk on with a rigid neck until her dress be only a white flutter among the leave . then , with a sunken head and a heavy heart , he plod wearily down the other path , wroth with himself for the rude and uncouth tongue which have give offence where so little be intend . he have go some way , lose in doubt and in self-reproach , his mind all tremulous with a thousand new-found thought and fear and wonderment , when of a sudden there be a light rustle of the leave behind him , and , glance round , there be this graceful , creature , tread in his very shadow , with her proud head bow , even as his picture of humility and repentance . " i shall not vex you , nor even speak , " she say ; " but i would fain keep with you while we be in the wood . " " nay , you can vex me , " he answer , all warm again at the very sight of her . " it be my rough word which vex you ; but i have be throw among man all my life , and indeed , with all the will , i scarce know how to temper my speech to a lady 's ear . " " then unsay it , " cry she quickly ; " say that i be right to wish to have vengeance on the . " " nay , i can do that , " he answer gravely . " then who be and unkind now ? " she cry in triumph . " how stern and cold you be for one so young ! surely no mere clerk , but bishop or cardinal at the least . shouldst have crozier for staff and mitre for , well , for your sake i will forgive the and take vengeance on none but on my own wilful self who must needs run into danger 's path . so will that please you , sir ? " " there speak your true self , " say he ; " and you will find more pleasure in such forgiveness than in any vengeance . " she shake her head , as if by no mean assure of it , and then with a sudden little cry , which have more of surprise than of joy in it , " here be with the horse ! " down the glade there come a little green-clad page with laugh eye , and long curl float behind him . he sit perch on a high bay horse , and hold on to the bridle of a spirited black palfrey , the hide of both glisten from a long run . " i have seek you everywhere , dear , " say he in a piping voice , spring down from his horse and hold the stirrup . " troubadour gallop as far as ere i could catch him . i trust that you have have no hurt or ? " he shoot a questioning glance at as he speak . " no , , " say she , " thank to this courteous stranger . and now , sir , " she continue , spring into her saddle , " it be not fit that i leave you without a word more . clerk or no , you have act this day as become a true knight . and all his table could not have do more . it may be that , as some small return , my father or his kin may have power to advance your interest . he be not rich , but he be honor and have great friend . tell me what be your purpose , and see if he may not aid it . " " alas ! lady , i have now no purpose . i have but two friend in the world , and they have go to , where it be likely i shall join them . " " and where be ? " " at the castle which be hold by the brave knight , , constable to the of . " to his surprise she burst out , and , spur her palfrey , dash off down the glade , with her page ride behind her . not one word do she say , but as she vanish amid the tree she half turn in her saddle and wave a last greeting . long time he stand , half hope that she might again come back to him ; but the thud of the hoof have die away , and there be no sound in all the wood but the gentle rustle and drop of the leave . at last he turn away and make his way back to the person from the light-hearted boy who have leave it a short three hour before . if he might not return to within the year , and if his brother 's dog be to be set upon him if he show face upon land , then indeed he be adrift upon earth . north , south , east , and might turn where he would , but all be equally chill and cheerless . the have roll ten silver crown in a and hide them away in the bottom of his scrip , but that would be a sorry support for twelve long month . in all the darkness there be but the one bright spot of the sturdy comrade whom he have leave that morning ; if he could find them again all would be well . the afternoon be not very advanced , for all that have befall him . when a man be afoot at cock-crow much may be do in the day . if he walk fast he might yet overtake his friend ere they reach their destination . he push on therefore , now walk and now run . as he journey he bit into a crust which remain from his bread , and he wash it down by a draught from a woodland stream . it be no easy or light thing to journey through this great forest , which be some twenty mile from east to west and a good sixteen from in the north to in the south . , however , have the good fortune to fall in with a woodman , axe upon shoulder , trudge along in the very direction that he wish to go . with his guidance he pass the fringe of , famous for old ash and yew , through with its giant , and on through the grove , where the giant oak be already a great tree , but only one of many comely brother . they plod along together , the woodman and , with little talk on either side , for their thought be as far asunder as the pole . the peasant 's gossip have be of the hunt , of the bracken , of the kite that have nest in , and of the great catch of herring bring back by the boat of 's . the clerk 's mind be on his brother , on his all on this strange , fierce , melting , beautiful woman who have break so suddenly into his life , and as suddenly pass out of it again . so distrait be he and so random his answer , that the woodman take to whistle , and soon branch off upon the track to , leave upon the main road . down this he push as fast as he might , hope at every turn and rise to catch sight of his companion of the morning . from to walk the wood grow thick and dense up to the very edge of the track , but beyond the country open up into broad moor , fleck with clump of tree , and top each other in long , low curve up to the dark line of forest in the furthest distance . cloud of insect dance and buzz in the golden autumn light , and the air be full of the piping of the . long , glint dragonfly shoot across the path , or hang tremulous with gauzy wing and gleam body . once a sea eagle soar scream high over the traveller 's head , and again a flock of brown bustard pop up from among the bracken , and blunder away in their clumsy fashion , half running , half fly , with strident cry and whirr of wing . there be folk , too , to be meet upon the and courier , chapman and fellow for the most part , with a rough jest and homely greeting for each other and for . near he come upon five seaman , on their way from to red-faced man , who shout at him in a jargon which he could scarce understand , and hold out to him a great pot from which they have be would they let him pass until he have dip pannikin in and take a mouthful , which set him cough and choke , with the tear run down his cheek . further on he meet a sturdy man , mount on a brown horse , with a rosary in his right hand and a long two-handed sword jangle against his . by his black robe and the cross upon his sleeve , recognize him as one of the of of , whose presbytery be at . he hold up two finger as he pass , with a " , mi ! " whereat doff hat and bent knee , look with much reverence at one who have devote his life to the overthrow of the infidel . poor simple lad ! he have not learn yet that what man be and what man profess to be be very wide asunder , and that the of , have come into large part of the riches of the ill-fated , be very much too comfortable to think of exchange their palace for a tent , or the cellar of for the thirsty desert of . yet ignorance may be more precious than wisdom , for as he walk on brace himself to a high life by the thought of this other 's sacrifice , and strengthen himself by his example which he could scarce have do have he know that the 's mind run more upon malmsey than on , and on venison rather than victory . as he press on the plain turn to wood once more in the region of walk , and a cloud sweep up from the south with the sun shine through the chink of it . a few great drop come patter loudly down , and then in a moment the steady swish of a brisk shower , with the drip and drop of the leave . , glance round for shelter , see a thick and lofty , so hollow out beneath that no house could have be dry . under this canopy of green two man be already squat , who wave their hand to that he should join them . as he approach he see that they have five dry herring lay out in front of them , with a great hunch of wheaten bread and a leathern flask full of milk , but instead of set to at their food they appear to have forget all about it , and be dispute together with flush face and angry gesture . it be easy to see by their dress and manner that they be two of those wander student who form about this time so enormous a multitude in every country in . the one be long and thin , with melancholy feature , while the other be fat and sleek , with a loud voice and the air of a man who be not to be gainsay . " come hither , good youth , " he cry , " come hither ! . heed not the face of my good coz here . in cornu , as have it ; but i warrant him harmless for all that . " " stint your bull be bellow ! " exclaim the other . " if it come to , i have a line in my mind : -- -- -- how do it run ? the english be that a man of sense should ever avoid a great talker . that be so , if all be man of sense then thou wouldst be a lonesome man , coz . " " alas ! , i fear that your logic be as bad as your philosophy or your wit it would be hard to say a bad word than that for it . for , hark : grant , argumentum , that i be a talker , then the true reasoning run that since all man of sense should avoid me , and thou not avoid me , but art at the present moment eat herring with me under a , ergo you be no man of sense , which be exactly what i have be din into your long ear ever since i first clap eye on your sunken chop . " " tut , tut ! " cry the other . " your tongue go like the clapper of a mill-wheel . sit down here , friend , and partake of this herring . understand first , however , that there be certain condition attach to it . " " i have hope , " say , fall into the humor of the twain , " that a of bread and a draught of milk might be attach to it . " " hark to him , hark to him ! " cry the little fat man . " it be even thus , ! wit , lad , be a catch thing , like the itch or the sweat sickness . i exude it round me ; it be an aura . i tell you , coz , that no man can come within seventeen foot of me without catch a spark . look at your own case . a dull man never step , and yet within the week you have say three thing which might pass , and one thing the day we leave which i should not have be ashamed of myself . " " enough , , enough ! " say the other . " the milk you shall have and the bread also , friend , together with the herring , but you must hold the scale between us . " " if he hold the herring he hold the scale , my sapient brother , " cry the fat man . " but i pray you , good youth , to tell us whether you be a learn clerk , and , if so , whether you have study at or at . " " i have some small stock of learn , " answer , pick at his herring , " but i have be at neither of these place . i be breed amongst the monk at . " " , ! " they cry both together . " what sort of an upbringing be that ? " non , " quoth . " come , brother , he have some tincture of letter , " say the melancholy man more hopefully . " he may be the good judge , since he have no call to side with either of us . now , attention , friend , and let your ear work as well as your nether jaw . -- know the old saw . here be i uphold the good fame of the learn against the foolish and poor silly reasoning of . " " while i , " quoth the other loudly , " do maintain the good sense and extraordinary wisdom of that most learn against the fantasy of the muddy scotchman , who have hide such little wit as he have under so vast a pile of word , that it be like one drop of in a firkin of . his wisdom would not suffice to say what the rogue mean . " " certes , , his wisdom do not suffice , " cry the other . " it be as though a mole cry out against the morning star , because he could not see it . but our dispute , friend , be concern the nature of that subtle essence which we call thought . for i hold with the learn that thought be in very truth a thing , even as vapor or fume , or many other substance which our gross bodily eye be blind to . for , look you , that which produce a thing must be itself a thing , and if a man 's thought may produce a written book , then must think itself be a material thing , even as the book be . have i express it ? do i make it plain ? " " whereas i hold , " shout the other , " with my revere preceptor , doctor , et , that all thing be but think ; for when thought be go i where be the thing then ? here be tree about us , and i see them because i think i see them , but if i have swoon , or sleep , or am in wine , then , my think have go forth from me , the tree go forth also . how now , coz , have i touch on the raw ? " sit between them munch his bread , while the twain dispute across his knee , lean forward with flush face and dart hand , in all the heat of argument . have he hear such jargon of scholastic philosophy , such fine-drawn distinction , such of major and minor , proposition , syllogism , attack and refutation . question clatter upon answer like a sword on a buckler . the ancient , the father of the , the modern , the , the arabian , be each send hurtle against the other , while the rain still drip and the dark glisten with the moisture . at last the fat man seem to weary of it , for he set to work quietly upon his meal , while his opponent , as proud as the rooster who be left unchallenged upon the midden , crow away in a last long burst of quotation and deduction . suddenly , however , his eye drop upon his food , and he give a howl of dismay . " you double thief ! " he cry , " you have eat my herring , and i without bite or sup since morning . " " that , " quoth the other complacently , " be my final argument , my crown effort , or , as the orator have it . for , coz , since all thought be thing , you have but to think a pair of herring , and then conjure up a pottle of milk wherewith to wash them down . " " a brave piece of reasoning , " cry the other , " and i know of but one reply to it . " on which , lean forward , he catch his comrade a rousing smack across his rosy cheek . " nay , take it not amiss , " he say , " since all thing be but thought , then that also be but a thought and may be disregard . " this last argument , however , by no mean commend itself to the pupil of , who pluck a great stick from the ground and signify his dissent by smite the realist over the pate with it . by good fortune , the wood be so light and rotten that it go to a thousand splinter , but think it well to leave the twain to settle the matter at their leisure , the more so as the sun be shine brightly once more . look back down the road , he see the two excited philosopher wave their hand and shout at each other , but their babble soon become a mere drone in the distance , and a turn in the road hide them from his sight . and now after pass and the , the forest begin to shred out into scattered belt of tree , with gleam of and stretch of between . here and there by the wayside stand little knot of hut with laborer lounge by the door and red-cheeked child sprawl in the roadway . back among the grove he could see the high gable end and thatch roof of the franklin ' house , on whose field these man find employment , or more often a thick dark column of smoke mark their position and hint at the coarse plenty within . by these sign know that he be on the very fringe of the forest , and therefore no great way from . the sun be lie low in the west and shoot its level ray across the long sweep of rich green country , glint on the sheep and throw long shadow from the red kine who wade knee-deep in the juicy clover . right glad be the traveller to see the high tower of gleam in the mellow evening light , and glad still when , on round a corner , he come upon his comrade of the morning seat astraddle upon a fall tree . they have a flat space before them , on which they alternately throw little square piece of bone , and be so intent upon their occupation that they never raise eye as he approach them . he observe with astonishment , as he draw near , that the archer 's bow be on 's back , the archer 's sword by 's side , and the steel cap lay upon the tree-trunk between them . " ma vie ! " shout , look down at the dice . " never have i such cursed luck . a murrain on the bone ! i have not throw a good main since i leave . a one and a three ! en avant , ! " " four and three , " cry , count on his great finger , " that make seven . , archer , i have cap ! now have at for jerkin ! " " ! " he growl , " i be like to reach in my shirt . " then suddenly glance up , " , by the splendor of heaven , here be our petit ! now , by my ten finger bone ! this be a rare sight to mine eye . " he spring up and throw his arm round 's neck , while , no less pleased , but more backward and saxon in his habit , stand grin and bob by the wayside , with his newly win steel cap stick wrong side foremost upon his tangle of red hair . " come to stop ? " cry the bowman , pat all over in his delight . " shall not get away from us again ! " " i wish no good , " say he , with a in the eye at this hearty greeting . " well say , lad ! " cry big . " we three shall to the war together , and the devil may fly away with the of ! but your foot and hosen be all . be in the water , or i be the more mistaken . " " i have in good sooth , " answer , and then as they journey on their way he tell them the many thing that have befall him , his meeting with the villein , his sight of the king , his come upon his brother , with all the tale of the black welcome and of the fair damsel . they stride on either side , each with an ear slant towards him , but ere he have come to the end of his story the bowman have spin round upon his heel , and be hasten back the way they have come , breathe loudly through his nose . " what then ? " ask , trot after him and grip at his jerkin . " i be back for , lad . " " and why , in the name of sense ? " " to thrust a handful of steel into the . what ! hale a demoiselle against her will , and then loose dog at his own brother ! let me go ! " " , ! " cry , laugh . " there be no do . come back , so , by mingle push and entreaty , they get his head round for once more . yet he walk with his chin upon his shoulder , until , catch sight of a maiden by a wayside well , the smile come back to his face and peace to his heart . " but you , " say , " there have be change with you also . why should not the workman carry his tool ? where be bow and sword and why so warlike , ? " " it be a game which friend have be of me . " " and i find him an pupil , " grumble the bowman . " he have strip me as though i have fall into the hand of the . but , by my hilt ! you must render them back to me , , lest you bring discredit upon my mission , and i will pay you for them at armorer ' price . " " take them back , man , and never heed the pay , " say . " i do but wish to learn the feel of them , since i be like to have such trinket hang to my own girdle for some year to come . " " , he be bear for a free companion ! " cry , " he have the very trick of speech and turn of thought . i take them back then , and indeed it give me unease not to feel my tap against my leg bone . but see , mes garcon , on this side of the church rise the square and darkling tower of 's castle , and even from here i seem to see on yonder banner the red roebuck of the . " " upon white , " say , shade his eye ; " but whether roebuck or no be more than i could vouch . how black be the great tower , and how bright the gleam of arm upon the wall ! see below the flag , how it twinkle like a star ! " " aye , it be the steel of the watchman , " remark the archer . " but we must on , if we be to be there before the drawbridge rise at the vespers bugle ; for it be likely that , be so renown a soldier , may keep hard discipline within the wall , and let no man enter after sundown . " so say , he quicken his pace , and the three comrade be soon close to the straggle and town which center round the noble church and the frown castle . it chance on that very evening that , have sup before sunset , as be his custom , and have himself see that and , his two war-horse , with the thirteen hack , the five , my lady 's three palfrey , and the great , have all their need supply , have take his dog for an evening breather . sixty or seventy of them , large and small , smooth and , , , wolf-hound , mastiff , , , lurcher , terrier , , yell and whine , with score of loll tongue and wave tail , come surge down the narrow lane which lead from the kennel to the bank of . two varlet , with loud halloo and crack whip , walk amid the swarm , guiding , controlling , and urge . behind come himself , with upon his arm , the pair walk slowly and sedately , as befit both their age and their condition , while they watch with a smile in their eye the scramble crowd in front of them . they pause , however , at the bridge , and , lean their elbow upon the stonework , they stand look down at their own face in the glassy stream , and at the swift flash of speckle trout against the tawny gravel . be a slight man of poor stature , with soft lisp voice and gentle way . so short be he that his wife , who be no very tall woman , have the good of him by the breadth of three finger . his sight have be injure in his early war by a basketful of lime which have be empty over him when he lead the of 's up the breach at , he have contract something of a stoop , with a blink , peer expression of face . his age be six and forty , but the constant practice of arm , together with a cleanly life , have preserve his activity and endurance unimpaired , so that from a distance he seem to have the slight limb and swift grace of a boy . his face , however , be tan of a dull yellow tint , with a leathery , look , which speak of rough outdoor doing , and the little pointed beard which he wear , in deference to the prevailing fashion , be streak and shoot with gray . his feature be small , delicate , and regular , with clear-cut , curve nose , and eye which jut forward from the lid . his dress be simple and yet spruce . a hat of , bear in the band the token of our of , be draw low upon the leave side to hide that ear which have be partly shear from his head by a flemish man-at-arms in a camp broil before . his , or tunic , and be of a purple plum color , with long weeper which hang from either sleeve to below his knee . his shoe be of red leather , daintily point at the toe , but not yet prolonged to the extravagant length which the succeed reign be to bring into fashion . a belt of knighthood encircle his loin , with his arm , five rose gules on a field argent , cunningly work upon the clasp . so stand upon the bridge of , and talk lightly with his lady . and , certes , have the two visage alone be see , and the stranger be ask which be the more likely to belong to the bold warrior whose name be love by the rough soldiery of , he have assuredly select the lady 's . her face be large and square and red , with fierce , thick brow , and the eye of one who be accustom to rule . tall and broad than her husband , her flowing gown of , and fur-lined tippet , could not conceal the gaunt and outline of her figure . it be the age of martial woman . the deed of black of , of and of the of , be still fresh in the public mind . with such example before them the wife of the english captain have become as warlike as their mate , and order their castle in their absence with the prudence and discipline of veteran seneschal . right easy be the of their of , and little have they to dread from rove galley or french squadron , while have the order of it . yet even in that age it be think that , though a lady might have a soldier 's heart , it be scarce as well that she should have a soldier 's face . there be man who say that of all the stern passage and daring deed by which have prove the true temper of his courage , not the least be his woo and win of so forbid a dame . " i tell you , my fair lord , " she be say , " that it be no fit training for a demoiselle : hawk and hound , rote and citole sing a french rondel , or read the , as i find her , pretend sleep , the artful , with the corner of the scroll thrust forth from under her pillow . lend her by of the priory , be ever her answer . how shall all this help her when she have castle of her own to keep , with a hundred mouth all agape for beef and beer ? " " true , my sweet bird , true , " answer the knight , pick a comfit from his gold . " the maid be like the young filly , which kick heel and plunge for very lust of life . give her time , dame , give her time . " " well , i know that my father would have give me , not time , but a good across my shoulder . ! i know not what the world be come to , when young maid may flout their elder . i wonder that you do not correct her , my fair lord . " " , my heart 's comfort , i never raise hand to woman yet , and it would be a pass strange thing if i begin on my own flesh and blood . it be a woman 's hand which cast this lime into mine eye , and though i see her stoop , and might well have stop her ere she throw , i deem it unworthy of my knighthood to hinder or balk one of her sex . " " the hussy ! " cry clench her broad right hand . " i would i have be at the side of her ! " " and so would i , since you would have be the near me my own . but i doubt not that you be right , and that 's wing need clipping , which i may leave in your hand when i be go , for , in sooth , this peaceful life be not for me , and be it not for your gracious kindness and loving care i could not abide it a week . i hear that there be talk of warlike muster at once more , and by ! it would be a new thing if the lion of and the red pile of be to be see in the field , and the rose of be not wave by their side . " " now woe worth me but i fear it ! " cry she , with the color all strike from her face . " i have note your absent mind , your kindling eye , your try and rivet of old harness . consider my sweet lord , that you have already win much honor , that we have see but little of each other , that you bear upon your body the scar of over twenty wound receive in i know not how many bloody encounter . have you not do enough for honor and the public cause ? " " my lady , when our liege lord , the king , at three score year , and my at three-score and ten , be blithe and ready to lay lance in rest for 's cause , it would ill me to prate of service do . it be sooth that i have receive seven and twenty wound . there be the more reason that i should be thankful that i be still long of breath and sound in limb . i have also see some bickering and scuffle . six great land battle i count , with four upon sea , and seven and fifty , skirmish and . i have hold two and twenty town , and i have be at the of . surely then it would be bitter shame to me , and also to you , since my fame be yours , that i should now hold back if a man 's work be to be do . besides , bethink you how low be our purse , with bailiff and reeve ever croak of empty farm and wasting land . be it not for this which the of have bestow upon us we could scarce uphold the state which be fitting to our degree . therefore , my sweeting , there be the more need that i should turn to where there be good pay to be earn and brave ransom to be win . " " ah , my dear lord , " quoth she , with sad , weary eye . " i think that at last i have you to mine own self , even though your youth have be spend afar from my side . yet my voice , as i know well , should speed you on to glory and renown , not hold you back when fame be to be win . yet what can i say , for all man know that your valor need the curb and not the spur . it go to my heart that you should ride forth now a mere knight bachelor , when there be no noble in the land who have so good a claim to the square pennon , save only that you have not the money to uphold it . " " and whose fault that , my sweet bird ? " say he . " no fault , my fair lord , but a virtue : for how many rich ransom have you win , and yet have scatter the crown among page and archer and varlet , until in a week you have not as much as would buy food and forage . it be a most knightly largesse , and yet money how can man rise ? " " dirt and dross ! " cry he . " what matter rise or fall , so that duty be do and honor gain . banneret or bachelor , square pennon or fork , i would not give a denier for the difference , and the less since , choose flower of english chivalry , be himself but a humble knight . but meanwhile fret not , my heart 's dove , for it be like that there may be no war wage , and we must await the news . but here be three stranger , and one , as i take it , a soldier fresh from service . it be likely that he may give us word of what be stir over the water . " , glance up , see in the fading light three companion walk abreast down the road , all gray with dust , and stain with travel , yet chatter merrily between themselves . he in the midst be young and comely , with boyish open face and bright gray eye , which glance from right to leave as though he find the world around him both new and pleasing . to his right walk a huge red-headed man , with broad smile and merry twinkle , whose clothes seem to be burst and split at every seam , as though he be some lusty chick who be break bravely from his shell . on the other side , with his knotted hand upon the young man 's shoulder , come a stout and burly archer , brown and fierce eyed , with sword at belt and long yellow peep over his shoulder . hard face , batter head piece , dint brigandine , with fade red lion of ramp on a discolor ground , all proclaim as plainly as word that he be indeed from the land of war . he look keenly at as he approach , and then , plunge his hand under his breastplate , he step up to him with a rough , uncouth bow to the lady . " your pardon , fair sir , " say he , " but i know you the moment i clap eye on you , though in sooth i have see you often in steel than in velvet . i have draw string besides you at , , , , , and other place . " " then , good archer , i be right glad to welcome you to , and in the steward 's room you will find for yourself and comrade . to me also your face be know , though mine eye play such trick with me that i can scarce be sure of my own squire . rest awhile , and you shall come to the hall anon and tell us what be pass in , for i have hear that it be likely that our pennon may flutter to the south of the great spanish mountain ere another year be pass . " " there be talk of it in , " answer the archer , " and i see myself that the armorer and smith be as busy as rat in a . but i bring you this letter from the valiant gascon knight , . and to you , , " he add after a pause , " i bring from him this box of red sugar of , with every courteous and knightly greeting which a gallant cavalier may make to a fair and noble dame . " this little speech have cost the blunt bowman much pain and plan ; but he might have spare his breath , for the lady be quite as much absorb as her lord in the letter , which they hold between them , a hand on either corner , spell it out very slowly , with draw brow and mutter lip . as they read it , , who stand with a few pace back from their comrade , see the lady catch her breath , while the knight laugh softly to himself . " you see , dear heart , " say he , " that they will not leave the old dog in his kennel when the game be afoot . and what of this , archer ? " " ah , sir , you speak of dog , " cry ; " but there be a pack of lusty hound who be ready for any quarry , if they have but a good huntsman to halloo them on . , we have be in the war together , and i have see many a brave following but never such a set of woodland boy as this . they do but want you at their head , and who will bar the way to them ! " " ! " say , " if they be all like their messenger , they be indeed man of whom a leader may be proud . your name , good archer ? " " , sir , of the of and the of . " " and this giant behind you ? " " he be big , of , a forest man , who have now take service in the company . " " a proper figure of a man , " say the little knight . " why , man , you be no chicken , yet i warrant him the strong man . see to that great stone from the coping which have fall upon the bridge . four of my lazy varlet strive this day to carry it hence . i would that you two could put them to shame by budge it , though i fear that i overtask you , for it be of a grievous weight . " he point as he speak to a huge rough-hew block which lie by the roadside , deep sink from its own weight in the reddish earth . the archer approach it , roll back the sleeve of his jerkin , but with no very hopeful countenance , for indeed it be a mighty rock . , however , put him aside with his left hand , and , stoop over the stone , he pluck it single-handed from its soft bed and swing it far into the stream . there it fall with mighty splash , one jagged end peak out above the surface , while the water bubble and foam with eddy . " good lack ! " cry , and " good lack ! " cry his lady , while stand laugh and wipe the cake dirt from his finger . " i have feel his arm round my rib , " say the bowman , " and they crackle yet at the thought of it . this other comrade of mine be a right learn clerk , for all that he be so young , hight , the son of , brother to the of . " " young man , " quoth , sternly , " if you be of the same way of thought as your brother , you may not pass under portcullis of mine . " " , fair sir , " cry hastily , " i will be pledge for it that they have no think in common ; for this very day his brother have set his dog upon him , and drive him from his land . " " and be you , too , of the company ? " ask . " have small experience of war , if i may judge by your look and bearing . " " i would fain to with my friend here , " answer ; " but i be a man of reader , exorcist , acolyte , and clerk . " " that need not hinder , " quoth . " no , fair sir , " cry the bowman joyously . " why , i myself have serve two term with , he whom they call the archpriest . by my hilt ! i have see him ere now , with monk 's gown truss to his knee , over his sandal in blood in the of the battle . yet , ere the last string have twang , he would be down on his four bone among the stricken , and have them all housel and shrive , as quick as shell pea . ! there be those who wish that he would have less care for their soul and a little more for their body ! " " it be well to have a learn clerk in every troop , " say . " by , there be man so caitiff that they think more of a scrivener 's pen than of their lady 's smile , and do their in hope that they may fill a line in a chronicle or make a tag to a jongleur 's romance . i remember well that , at the siege of , there be a little , sleek , fat clerk of the name of , who be so apt at rondel , sirvente , or , that no man dare give back a foot from the wall , lest he find it all set down in his rhyme and sing by every underling and varlet in the camp . but , my soul 's bird , you hear me prate as though all be decide , when i have not yet take counsel either with you or with my lady mother . let us to the chamber , while these stranger find such fare as pantry and cellar may furnish . " " the night air strike chill , " say the lady , and turn down the road with her hand upon her lord 's arm . the three comrade drop behind and follow : much the lighter for have accomplish his mission , full of wonderment at the humble bearing of so renown a captain , and loud with snort and sneer , which speak his disappointment and contempt . " what ail the man ? " ask in surprise . " i have be cozen and , " quoth he gruffly . " by whom , the strong ? " " by , the false prophet . " " by my hilt ! " cry the archer , " though i be not , yet i hold converse with the very creature that speak to him . what be amiss , then , and how have i play you false ? " " why , marry , do you not say , and here will be my witness , that , if i would hie to the war with you , you would place me under a leader who be second to none in all for valor ? yet here you bring me to a shred of a man , peaky and , with eye like a moult owl , who must need , forsooth , take counsel with his mother ere he buckle sword to girdle . " " be that where the shoe gall ? " cry the bowman , and laugh aloud . " i will ask you what you think of him three month hence , if we be all alive ; for sure i be that -- -- -- " 's word be interrupt by an extraordinary hubbub which break out that instant some little way down the street in the direction of the priory . there be shouting of man , frightened shriek of woman , howl and bark of cur , and over all a sullen , thunderous rumble , indescribably menace and terrible . round the corner of the narrow street there come rush a brace of whine dog with tail tuck under their leg , and after them a burgher , with outstretch hand and finger , his hair all and his eye glint back from one shoulder to the other , as though some great terror be at his very heel . " fly , my lady , fly ! " he screech , and whiz past them like bolt from bow ; while close behind come lumber a huge black bear , with red tongue loll from his mouth , and a break chain jangle behind him . to right and leave the folk fly for arch and doorway . catch up the as though she have be a feather , and spring with her into an open porch ; while , with a whirl of french oath , pluck at his quiver and try to unsling his bow . , all unnerved at so strange and unwonted a sight , shrink up against the wall with his eye fix upon the frenzied creature , which come bound along with ungainly speed , look the large in the uncertain light , its huge jaw agape , with blood and slaver trickle to the ground . alone , unconscious to all appearance of the universal panic , walk with unfaltering step up the centre of the road , a silken handkerchief in one hand and his gold in the other . it send the blood cold through 's vein to see that as they come man and the creature rear up , with eye ablaze with fear and hate , and whirl its great paw above the knight to smite him to the earth . he , however , blink with pucker eye , reach up his kerchief , and flick the beast twice across the snout with it . " ah , saucy ! saucy , " quoth he , with gentle chide ; on which the bear , uncertain and puzzle , drop its four leg to earth again , and , waddle back , be soon swathe in rope by the and a crowd of peasant who have be in close pursuit . a scared man be the keeper ; for , have chain the brute to a stake while he drink a stoup of ale at the inn , it have be bait by stray cur , until , in wrath and madness , it have pluck loose the chain , and smite or bite all who come in its path . most scare of all be he to find that the creature have come nigh to harm the and of the castle , who have power to place him in the or to have the skin scourge from his shoulder . yet , when he come with bow head and humble entreaty for forgiveness , he be meet with a handful of small silver from , whose dame , however , be less charitably dispose , be much ruffle in her dignity by the manner in which she have be hustle from her lord 's side . as they pass through the castle gate , pluck at 's sleeve , and the two fall behind . " i must crave your pardon , comrade , " say he , bluntly . " i be a fool not to know that a little rooster may be the game . i believe that this man be indeed a leader whom we may follow . " be the mouth of , though a pair of torch burn at the further end of the gateway cast a red glare over the outer bailey , and send a dim , ruddy flicker through the rough-hew arch , rise and fall with fitful brightness . over the door the traveller could discern the escutcheon of the , a roebuck gules on a field argent , flank on either side by small shield which bear the red rose of the veteran constable . as they pass over the drawbridge , mark the gleam of arm in the embrasure to right and leave , and they have scarce set foot upon the causeway ere a hoarse blare burst from a bugle , and , with screech of hinge and clank of chain , the ponderous bridge swing up into the air , draw by unseen hand . at the same instant the huge portcullis come rattle down from above , and shut off the last fading light of day . and his lady walk on in deep talk , while a fat take charge of the three comrade , and lead them to the buttery , where beef , bread , and beer be keep ever in readiness for the wayfarer . after a hearty meal and a dip in the trough to wash the dust from them , they stroll forth into the bailey , where the bowman peer about through the darkness at wall and at keep , with the carp eye of one who have see something of siege , and be not likely to be satisfy . to and to , however , it appear to be as great and as stout a fortress as could be build by the hand of man . erect by in the old fight day of the twelfth century , when man think much of war and little of comfort , have be design as a stronghold pure and simple , unlike those later and more magnificent structure where warlike strength have be combine with the magnificence of a palace . from the time of the such building as or castle , to say nothing of , have show that it be possible to secure luxury in peace as well as security in time of trouble . 's trust , however , still frown above the water of the avon , very much as the stern race of early have design it . there be the broad outer and inner bailie , not pave , but sow with grass to nourish the sheep and cattle which might be drive in on sign of danger . all round be high and turreted wall , with at the corner a bare keep , gaunt and windowless , rear up from a lofty mound , which make it almost inaccessible to an assailant . against the be row of frail wooden house and lean shed , which give shelter to the archer and man-at-arms who form the garrison . the door of these humble dwelling be mostly open , and against the yellow glare from within could see the bearded fellow clean their harness , while their wife would come out for a gossip , with their needlework in their hand , and their long black shadow stream across the yard . the air be full of the clack of their voice and the merry prattle of child , in strange contrast to the flash of arm and constant warlike challenge from the wall above . " methinks a company of school lad could hold this place against an army , " quoth . " and so say i , " say . " nay , there you be wide of the clout , " the bowman say gravely . " by my hilt ! i have see a strong fortalice carry in a summer evening . i remember such a one in , with a name as long as a 's pedigree . it be when i serve under , before the day of the company ; and we come by good plunder at the sacking of it . i have myself a great silver bowl , with two goblet , and a plastron of spanish steel . ! there be some fine woman over yonder ! ma vie ! see to that one in the doorway ! i will go speak to her . but whom have we here ? " " be there an archer here hight ? " ask a gaunt man-at-arms , clank up to them across the courtyard . " my name , friend , " quoth the bowman . " then sure i have no need to tell mine , " say the other . " by the rood ! if it be not of ! " cry . " a , , a ! ah , but i be blithe to see ! " the two fall upon each other and hug like bear . " and where from , old blood and bone ? " ask the bowman . " i be in service here . tell me , comrade , be it sooth that we shall have another fling at these frenchman ? it be so rumor in the , and that will take the field once more . " " it be like enough , gar . , as thing go . " " now may the be praise ! " cry the other . " this very night will i set apart a golden to be offer on the shrine of my . i have pine for this , , as a young maid pine for her lover . " " art so set on plunder then ? be the purse so light that there be not enough for a rouse ? i have a bag at my belt , , and you have but to put your fist into it for what you want . it be ever share and share between us . " " , friend , it be not the frenchman 's gold , but the frenchman 's blood that i would have . i should not rest quiet in the grave , coz , if i have not another turn at them . for with us in it have ever be fair and honest shut fist for the man , but a knee for the woman . but how be it at when their galley come down upon it some few year back ? i have an old mother there , lad , who have come down thither from the to be the near her son . they find her afterwards by her own hearthstone , thrust through by a frenchman 's bill . my second sister , my brother 's wife , and her two child , they be but in the smoking ruin of their house . i will not say that we have not wrought great upon , but woman and child have be safe from us . and so , old friend , my heart be hot within me , and i long to hear the old battle-cry again , and , by 's truth ! if unfurl his pennon , here be one who will be right glad to feel the under his knee . " " we have see good work together , old , " quoth ; " and , by my hilt ! we may hope to see more ere we die . but we be more like to hawk at the spanish woodcock than at the french heron , though certes it be rumor that with all the good lance of have take service under the lion and tower of . but , comrade , it be in my mind that there be some small matter of dispute still open between us . " " ' , it be sooth ! " cry the other ; " i have forget it . the and his man tear us apart when last we meet . " " on which , friend , we vow that we should settle the point when next we come together . sword , i see , and the moon throw glimmer enough for such old night-bird as we . on guard , gar . ! i have not hear clink of steel this month or more . " " out from the shadow then , " say the other , draw his sword . " a vow be a vow , and not lightly to be break . " " a vow to the saint , " cry , " be indeed not to be set aside ; but this be a devil 's vow , and , simple clerk as i be , i be yet the mouthpiece of the true church when i say that it be mortal sin to fight on such a quarrel . what ! shall two grown man carry malice for year , and fly like snarl cur at each other 's throat ? " " no malice , my young clerk , no malice , " quoth . " i have not a bitter drop in my heart for mine old comrade ; but the quarrel , as he have tell you , be still open and unsettled . fall on , ! " " not whilst i can stand between you , " cry , spring before the bowman . " it be shame and sin to see two christian englishman turn sword against each other like the frenzied bloodthirsty paynim . " " and , what be more , " say , suddenly appear out of the buttery with the huge board upon which the pastry be roll , " if either raise sword i shall flatten him like a pancake . by the black rood ! i shall drive him into the earth , like a nail into a door , rather than see you do to each other . " " ' , this be a strange way of preach peace , " cry . " you may find the yourself , my lusty friend , if you raise your great cudgel to me . i have as lief have the castle drawbridge drop upon my pate . " " tell me , , " say earnestly , with his hand outstretch to keep the pair asunder , " what be the cause of quarrel , that we may see whether honorable settlement may not be arrive at ? " the bowman look down at his foot and then up at the moon , " ! " he cry , " the cause of quarrel ? why , petit , it be year ago in , and how can i bear in mind what be the cause of it ? there have it at the end of his tongue . " " not i , in troth , " reply the other ; " i have have other thing to think of . there be some sort of bicker over dice , or wine , or be it a woman , coz ? " " ! but you have nick it , " cry . " it be indeed about a woman ; and the quarrel must go forward , for i be still of the same mind as before . " " what of the woman , then ? " ask . " the murrain strike me if i can call to mind aught about her . " " it be , maid at the sign of ' ' at . bless her pretty heart ! why , gar . , i love her . " " so do a many , " quoth . " i call her to mind now . on the very day that we fight over the little hussy , she go off with , a long-legged welsh . they have a hostel of their own now , somewhere on the bank of the , where the landlord drink so much of the liquor that there be little leave for the customer . " " so end our quarrel , then , " say , sheath his sword . " a welsh , ' faith ! gout , , and the more so when she have a jolly archer and a lusty man-at-arms to choose from . " " true , old lad . and it be as well that we can compose our difference honorably , for have be out at the first clash of steel ; and he have swear that if there be quarrel in the garrison he would smite the right hand from the broiler . you know him of old , and that he be like to be as good as his word . " " ! yes . but there be ale , mead , and wine in the buttery , and the steward a merry rogue , who will not haggle over a quart or two . , gar . , for it be not every day that two old friend come together . " the old soldier and stride off together in all good fellowship . have turn to follow them , when he feel a touch upon his shoulder , and find a young page by his side . " the command , " say the boy , " that you will follow me to the great chamber , and await him there . " " but my comrade ? " " his command be for you alone . " follow the messenger to the east end of the courtyard , where a broad flight of step lead up to the doorway of the main hall , the outer wall of which be wash by the water of the avon . as design at first , no dwelling have be allot to the lord of the castle and his family but the dark and dismal basement story of the keep . a more civilized or more effeminate generation , however , have refuse to be pen up in such a cellar , and the hall with its neighboring chamber have be add for their accommodation . up the broad step go , still follow his boyish guide , until at the folding oak door the latter pause , and usher him into the main hall of the castle . on enter the room the clerk look round ; but , see no one , he continue to stand , his cap in his hand , examine with the great interest a chamber which be so different to any to which he be accustom . the day have go by when a nobleman 's hall be but a , enclosure , the common lounge and of every inmate of the castle . the have bring back with them experience of domestic luxury , of carpet and rug of , which make them impatient of the hideous bareness and want of privacy which they find in their ancestral stronghold . still strong , however , have be the influence of the great french war ; for , however well match the nation might be in martial exercise , there could be no question but that our neighbor be infinitely superior to us in the art of peace . a stream of return knight , of wounded soldier , and of french nobleman , have be for a quarter of a century continually pour into , every one of whom exert an influence in the direction of great domestic refinement , while shipload of french furniture from , , and other plunder town , have supply our own artisan with model on which to shape their work . hence , in most english castle , and in among the rest , chamber be to be find which would seem to be not want either in beauty or in comfort . in the great stone fireplace a log fire be spurt and crackle , throw out a ruddy glare which , with the four which stand at each corner of the room , give a bright and lightsome air to the whole apartment . above be a of blazonry , extend up to the carve and cornice oaken roof ; while on either side stand the high canopy chair place for the master of the house and for his most honor guest . the wall be hang all round with most elaborate and brightly color tapestry , represent the achievement of of , and behind this convenient screen be store the table dormant and bench which would be need for banquet or high festivity . the floor be of polished tile , with a square of red and black diaper flemish carpet in the centre ; and many settee , cushion , fold chair , and carve litter all over it . at the further end be a long black buffet or dresser , thickly cover with gold cup , silver salver , and other such valuable . all this examine with curious eye ; but most interesting of all to him be a small ebony table at his very side , on which , by the side of a and the scattered chessman , there lie an open manuscript write in a right clerkly hand , and set forth with brave flourish and device along the margin . in vain bethink him of where he be , and of those law of good breeding and decorum which should restrain him : those color capital and black even line draw his hand down to them , as the loadstone draw the needle , until , almost before he know it , he be stand with the romance of before his eye , so absorb in its content as to be completely oblivious both of where he be and why he have come there . he be bring back to himself , however , by a sudden little ripple of quick feminine laughter . aghast , he drop the manuscript among the chessman and stare in bewilderment round the room . it be as empty and as still as ever . again he stretch his hand out to the romance , and again come that roguish burst of merriment . he look up at the ceiling , back at the closed door , and round at the stiff fold of motionless tapestry . of a sudden , however , he catch a quick shimmer from the corner of a high-backed in front of him , and , shift a pace or two to the side , see a white slender hand , which hold a mirror of polished silver in such a way that the conceal observer could see without be see . he stand irresolute , uncertain whether to advance or to take no notice ; but , even as he hesitate , the mirror be whip in , and a tall and stately young lady sweep out from behind the oaken screen , with a dancing light of mischief in her eye . start with astonishment as he recognize the very maiden who have suffer from his brother 's violence in the forest . she no longer wear her gay , however , but be attire in a long sweeping robe of black velvet of , with delicate tracery of white lace at neck and at wrist , scarce to be see against her ivory skin . beautiful as she have seem to him before , the lithe charm of her figure and the proud , free grace of her bearing be enhance now by the rich simplicity of her attire . " ah , you start , " say she , with the same sidelong look of mischief , " and i can marvel at it . not look to see the distressed damosel again . oh that i be a minstrel , that i might put it into rhyme , with the whole luckless maid , the wicked socman , and the virtuous clerk ! so might our fame have go down together for all time , and you be number with or galahad , or all the other rescuer of oppress lady . " " what i do , " say , " be too small a thing for thank ; and yet , if i may say it without offence , it be too grave and near a matter for mirth and raillery . i have count on my brother 's love , but have will that it should be otherwise . it be a joy to me to see you again , lady , and to know that you have reach home in safety , if this be indeed your home . " " yes , in sooth , be my home , and my father . i should have tell you so this morning , but you say that you be come thither , so i bethink me that i might hold it back as a surprise to you . oh dear , but it be brave to see you ! " she cry , burst out once more , and stand with her hand press to her side , and her eye twinkle with amusement . " you draw back and come forward with your eye upon my book there , like the mouse who sniff the cheese and yet dread the trap . " " i take shame , " say , " that i should have touch it . " " nay , it warm my very heart to see it . so glad be i , that i laugh for very pleasure . my fine preacher can himself be tempt then , think i ; he be not make of another clay to the rest of us . " " help me ! i be the weak of the weak , " groan . " i pray that i may have more strength . " " and to what end ? " she ask sharply . " if you be , as i understand , to shut yourself forever in your cell within the four wall of an abbey , then of what use would it be be your prayer to be answer ? " " the use of my own salvation . " she turn from him with a pretty shrug and wave . " be that all ? " she say . " then you be no good than and the rest of them . your own , your own , ever your own ! my father be the king 's man , and when he ride into the press of fight he be not think ever of the saving of his own poor body ; he reck little enough if he leave it on the field . why then should you , who be soldier of the spirit , be ever mope or hide in cell or in cave , with mind full of your own concern , while the world , which you should be mend , be go on its way , and neither see nor hear you ? be all as thoughtless of your own soul as the soldier be of his body , would be of more avail to the soul of other . " " there be sooth in what you say , lady , " answer ; " and yet i scarce can see what you would have the clergy and the church to do . " " i would have them live as other and do man 's work in the world , preach by their life rather than their word . i would have them come forth from their lonely place , mix with the folk , feel the pain and the pleasure , the care and the reward , the and the stirring of the common people . let them toil and , and labor , and plough the land , and take wife to themselves -- -- -- " " ! alas ! " cry aghast , " you have surely suck this poison from the man , of whom i have hear such evil thing . " " nay , i know him not . i have learn it by look from my own chamber window and mark these poor monk of the priory , their weary life , their profitless round . i have ask myself if the good which can be do with virtue be to shut it within high wall as though it be some savage creature . if the good will lock themselves up , and if the wicked will still wander free , then alas for the world ! " look at her in astonishment , for her cheek be flush , her eye gleam , and her whole pose full of eloquence and conviction . yet in an instant she have change again to her old expression of merriment leaven with mischief . " wilt do what i ask ? " say she . " what be it , lady ? " " oh , most clerk ! a true knight would never have ask , but would have vow upon the instant . ' but to bear me out in what i say to my father . " " in what ? " " in say , if he ask , that it be south of the road that i meet you . i shall be shut up with the else , and have a week of spindle and bodkin , when i would fain be gallop up walk , or loose little at the heron . " " i shall not answer him if he ask . " " not answer ! but he will have an answer . nay , but you must not fail me , or it will go ill with me . " " but , lady , " cry poor in great distress , " how can i say that it be to the south of the road when i know well that it be four mile to the north . " " you will not say it ? " " surely you will not , too , when you know that it be not so ? " " oh , i weary of your preaching ! " she cry , and sweep away with a toss of her beautiful head , leave as cast down and ashamed as though he have himself propose some infamous thing . she be back again in an instant , however , in another of her vary mood . " look at that , my friend ! " say she . " if you have be shut up in abbey or in cell this day you could not have teach a wayward maiden to abide by the truth . be it not so ? what avail be the shepherd if he leave his sheep . " " a sorry shepherd ! " say humbly . " but here be your noble father . " " and you shall see how worthy a pupil i be . father , i be much beholden to this young clerk , who be of service to me and help me this very morning in , four mile to the north of the road , where i have no call to be , you have order it otherwise . " all this she reel off in a loud voice , and then glance with sidelong , question eye at for his approval . , who have enter the room with a silvery-haired old lady upon his arm , stare aghast at this sudden outburst of candor . " , ! " say he , shake his head , " it be more hard for me to gain obedience from you than from the ten score drunken archer who follow me to . yet , hush ! little one , for your fair will be here anon , and there be no need that she should know it . we will keep you from the this journey . away to your chamber , sweeting , and keep a blithe face , for she who confess be shrive . and now , fair mother , " he continue , when his daughter have go , " sit you here by the fire , for your blood run cold than it do . , i would have a word with you , for i would fain that you should take service under me . and here in good time come my lady , without whose counsel it be not my wont to decide aught of import ; but , indeed , it be her own thought that you should come . " " for i have form a good opinion of you , and can see that you be one who may be trust , " say the . " and in good sooth my dear lord have need of such a one by his side , for he reck so little of himself that there should be one there to look to his need and meet his want . you have see the cloister ; it be well that you should see the world too , ere you make choice for life between them . " " it be for that very reason that my father will that i should come forth into the world at my twentieth year , " say . " then your father be a man of good counsel , " say she , " and you can carry out his will well than by go on this path , where all that be noble and gallant in will be your companion . " " you can ride ? " ask , look at the youth with pucker eye . " yes , i have ride much at the abbey . " " yet there be a difference betwixt a friar 's hack and a warrior 's destrier . you can sing and play ? " " on citole , flute and rebeck . " " good ! you can read blazonry ? " " indifferent well . " " then read this , " quoth , point upwards to one of the many quartering which adorn the wall over the fireplace . " argent , " answer , " a fess azure charge with three lozenge divide three mullet sable . over all , on an escutcheon of the first , a jambe gules . " " a jambe gules erase , " say , shake his head solemnly . " yet it be not amiss for a man . i trust that you be lowly and serviceable ? " " i have serve all my life , my lord . " " carve too ? " " i have carve two day a week for the brethren . " " a model truly ! wilt make a squire of squire . but tell me , i pray , curl hair ? " " no , my lord , but i could learn . " " it be of import , " say he , " for i love to keep my hair well order , see that the weight of my helmet for thirty year have in some degree fray it upon the top . " he pull off his velvet cap of maintenance as he speak , and display a pate which be as bald as an egg , and shine bravely in the firelight . " you see , " say he , whisk round , and show one little strip where a line of scattered hair , like the last survivor in some fatal field , still barely hold their own against the fate which have fall upon their comrade ; " these lock need some little oil and curl , for i doubt not that if you look slantwise at my head , when the light be good , you will yourself perceive that there be place where the hair be sparse . " " it be for you also to bear the purse , " say the lady ; " for my sweet lord be of so free and gracious a temper that he would give it to the first who ask alms of him . all these thing , with some knowledge of , and of the management of horse , hawk and hound , with the grace and hardihood and courtesy which be proper to your age , will make you a fit squire for . " " alas ! lady , " answer , " i know well the great honor that you have do me in deem me worthy to wait upon so renown a knight , yet i be so conscious of my own weakness that i scarce dare incur duty which i might be so ill-fitted to fulfil . " " modesty and a humble mind , " say she , " be the very first and rare gift in page or squire . your word prove that you have these , and all the rest be but the work of use and time . but there be no call for haste . rest upon it for the night , and let your orison ask for guidance in the matter . we know your father well , and would fain help his son , though we have small cause to love your brother the , who be forever stir up strife in the county . " " we can scare hope , " say , " to have all ready for our start before the feast of , for there be much to be do in the time . you will have leisure , therefore , if it please you to take service under me , in which to learn your . , my daughter 's page , be hot to go ; but in sooth he be over young for such rough work as may be before us . " " and i have one favor to crave from you , " add the lady of the castle , as turn to leave their presence . " you have , as i understand , much learning which you have acquire at . " " little enough , lady , compare with those who be my teacher . " " yet enough for my purpose , i doubt not . for i would have you give an hour or two a day whilst you be with us in discourse with my daughter , the ; for she be somewhat backward , i fear , and have no love for letter , save for these poor fond romance , which do but fill her empty head with dream of enchant maiden and of errant cavalier . come over after nones from the priory , but he be strike with year and slow of speech , so that she get small profit from his teaching . i would have you do what you can with her , and with my young , and with . " and so find himself not only choose as squire to a knight but also as squire to three , which be even further from the part which he have think to play in the world . yet he could but agree to do what he might , and so go forth from the castle hall with his face flush and his head in a whirl at the thought of the strange and perilous path which his foot be destine to tread . and now there come a time of stir and bustle , of furbish of arm and clang of hammer from all the county . fast spread the tidings from thorpe to thorpe and from castle to castle , that the old game be afoot once more , and the lion and lily to be in the field with the early spring . great news this for that fierce old country , whose trade for a generation have be war , her export archer and her import prisoner . for six year her son have chafe under an unwonted peace . now they fly to their arm as to their birthright . the old soldier of , of , and of be glad to think that they might hear the once more , and glad still be the hot youth who have chafe for year under the martial tale of their sire . to pierce the great mountain of the south , to fight the tamer of the fiery moor , to follow the great captain of the age , to find sunny cornfield and vineyard , when the march of and be as rare and bleak as the be a golden prospect for a race of warrior . from sea to sea there be string of bow in the cottage and clang of steel in the castle . nor do it take long for every stronghold to pour forth its cavalry , and every hamlet its footman . through the late autumn and the early winter every road and country lane resound with and trumpet , with the neigh of the war-horse and the clatter of march man . from the in the welsh march to the in the west or in the south , there be no from which the peasant might not have see the bright shimmer of arm , the toss and flutter of plume and of pensil . from , from woodland clearing , or from wind track these little rivulet of steel unite in the large road to form a broad stream , grow ever full and large as it approach the near or most commodious seaport . and there all day , and day after day , there be bustle and crowd and labor , while the great ship load up , and one after the other spread their white pinion and dart off to the open sea , amid the clash of cymbal and roll of drum and lusty shout of those who go and of those who wait . from to the there be no port which do not send forth its little fleet , gay with streamer and bunting , as for a joyous festival . thus in the season of the wane day the might of put forth on to the water . in the ancient and populous county of there be no lack of leader or of soldier for a service which promise either honor or profit . in the north the saracen 's head of the and the scarlet fish of the be wave over a strong body of archer from , , and forest . be up in the east , and in the west . , , , , , and stout be all march south with levy from , , and , while from come , , and , with a troop of pick man-at-arms , make for their port at . great of all the muster , however , be that of , for the name and the fame of draw towards him the keen and bold spirit , all eager to serve under so valiant a leader . archer from the and the of , from the pleasant country which be water by the , the avon , and the , young cavalier from the ancient house , all be push for to take service under the banner of the five scarlet rose . and now , could have show the of land which the law of rank require , he might well have cut his forked pennon into a square banner , and take such a following into the field as would have support the dignity of a banneret . but poverty be heavy upon him , his land be scant , his coffer empty , and the very castle which cover him the holding of another . sore be his heart when he see rare bowman and war-hardened spearman turn away from his gate , for the lack of the money which might equip and pay them . yet the letter which have bring him give him power which he be not slow to use . in it , the gascon lieutenant of the , assure him that there remain in his keep enough to fit out a hundred archer and twenty man-at-arms , which , join to the three hundred veteran companion already in , would make a force which any leader might be proud to command . carefully and sagaciously the veteran knight choose out his man from the swarm of volunteer . many an anxious consultation he hold with , , and other of his more experienced follower , as to who should come and who should stay . by all ' day , however ere the last leave have flutter to earth in the and glade , he have fill up his full number , and muster under his banner as stout a following of forester as ever twang their . twenty man-at-arms , too , well mount and equip , form the cavalry of the party , while young of , and of , the martial son of martial sire , come at their own cost to wait upon and to share with the duty of his . yet , even after the enrolment , there be much to be do ere the party could proceed upon its way . for armor , sword , and lance , there be no need to take much forethought , for they be to be have both good and cheap in than in . with the , however , it be different . yew stave indeed might be get in , but it be well to take enough and to spare with them . then three spare cord should be carry for each bow , with a great store of , besides the brigandine of chain mail , the wad steel cap , and the brassart or , which be the proper equipment of the archer . above all , the woman for mile round be hard at work cut the white surcoat which be the badge of the company , and adorn them with the red lion of upon the centre of the breast . when all be complete and the muster call in the castle yard the old soldier of the french war be fain to confess that he have never look upon a well equipped or more warlike body of man , from the old knight with his silk jupon , sit his great black war-horse in the front of them , to , the giant recruit , who lean carelessly upon a huge black in the rear . of the six score , fully half have see service before , while a fair sprinkling be man who have follow the war all their life , and have a hand in those battle which have make the whole world ring with the fame and the wonder of the island infantry . six long week be take in these preparation , and it be close on ere all be ready for a start . nigh two month have be in which be fate to turn the whole current of his life , to divert it from that dark and lonely bourne towards which it tend , and to guide it into free and more sunlit channel . already he have learn to bless his father for that wise provision which have make him seek to know the world ere he have venture to renounce it . for it be a different place from that which he have different from that which he have hear describe when the master of the novice hold forth to his charge upon the ravening wolf who lurk for them beyond the peaceful fold of . there be cruelty in it , doubtless , and lust and sin and sorrow ; but be there not virtue to atone , robust positive virtue which do not shrink from temptation , which hold their own in all the rough blast of the world ? how colorless by contrast appear the sinlessness which come from inability to sin , the conquest which be attain by fly from the enemy ! as he be , have native shrewdness and a mind which be young enough to form new conclusion and to outgrow old one . he could not fail to see that the man with whom he be throw in contact , , fierce and quarrelsome as they be , be yet of deep nature and of more service in the world than the ox-eyed brethren who rise and eat and sleep from year 's end to year 's end in their own narrow , stagnant circle of existence . be a good man , but how be he good than this kindly knight , who live as simple a life , hold as lofty and inflexible an ideal of duty , and do with all his fearless heart whatever come to his hand to do ? in turn from the service of the one to that of the other , could not feel that he be lower his aim in life . true that his gentle and thoughtful nature recoil from the grim work of war , yet in those day of martial order and militant brotherhood there be no gulf fix betwixt the priest and the soldier . the man of and the man of the sword might without scandal be unite in the same individual . why then should he , a mere clerk , have scruple when so fair a chance lie in his way of carry out the spirit as well as the letter of his father 's provision . much struggle it cost him , anxious and midnight , with many a doubt and a misgiving ; but the issue be that ere he have be three day in he have take service under , and have accept horse and harness , the same to be pay for out of his share of the profit of the expedition . henceforth for seven hour a day he strive in the tilt-yard to qualify himself to be a worthy squire to so worthy a knight . young , supple and active , with all the pen energy from year of pure and healthy living , it be not long before he could manage his horse and his weapon well enough to earn an approve nod from critical man-at-arms , or to hold his own against and , his . but be there no other consideration which sway him from the cloister towards the world ? so complex be the human spirit that it can itself scarce discern the deep spring which impel it to action . yet to have be open now a side of life of which he have be as innocent as a child , but one which be of such deep import that it could not fail to influence him in choose his path . a woman , in monkish precept , have be the embodiment and concentration of what be dangerous and focus whence spread all that be to be dread and avoid . so defile be their presence that a true might not raise his eye to their face or touch their under ban of church and fear of deadly sin . yet here , day after day for an hour after nones , and for an hour before vesper , he find himself in close communion with three maiden , all young , all fair , and all therefore doubly dangerous from the monkish standpoint . yet he find that in their presence he be conscious of a quick sympathy , a pleasant ease , a ready response to all that be most gentle and good in himself , which fill his soul with a vague and new-found joy . and yet the be no easy pupil to handle . an old and more man might have be puzzle by her vary mood , her sudden prejudice , her quick resentment at all constraint and authority . do a subject interest her , be there space in it for either romance or imagination , she would fly through it with her subtle , active mind , leave her two and even her teacher toil behind her . on the other hand , be there dull patience need with steady toil and strain of memory , no single fact could by any driving be fix in her mind . might talk to her of the storey of old god and hero , of gallant deed and lofty aim , or he might hold forth upon moon and star , and let his fancy wander over the hidden secret of the universe , and he would have a rapt listener with flush cheek and eloquent eye , who could repeat after him the very word which have fall from his lip . but when it come to and astrolabe , the counting of figure and reckoning of epicycle , away would go her thought to horse and hound , and a vacant eye and listless face would warn the teacher that he have lose his hold upon his scholar . then he have but to bring out the old romance book from the priory , with cover of sheepskin and gold letter upon a purple ground , to entice her wayward mind back to the path of learn . at time , too , when the wild fit be upon her , she would break into pertness and rebel openly against 's gentle firmness . yet he would jog quietly on with his teaching , take no heed to her mutiny , until suddenly she would be conquer by his patience , and break into a hundred time strong than her fault demand . it chance however that , on one of these morning when the evil mood be upon her , the young , think to please her mistress , begin also to toss her head and make tart rejoinder to the teacher 's question . in an instant the have turn upon her two blaze eye and a face which be blanch with anger . " you would dare ! " say she . " you would dare ! " the frightened try to excuse herself . " but my fair lady , " she stammer , " what have i do ? i have say no more than i hear . " " you would dare ! " repeat the lady in a choke voice . " you , a graceless baggage , a foolish , with no thought above the hem of shift . and he so kindly and and long-suffering ! you , you may well flee the room ! " she have speak with a rise voice , and a clasp and open of her long white finger , so that it be no marvel that ere the speech be over the skirt of be whisk round the door and the click of her sob to be hear die swiftly away down the corridor . stare open-eyed at this tigress who have spring so suddenly to his rescue . " there be no need for such anger , " he say mildly . " the maid 's word have do me no . it be you yourself who have err . " " i know it , " she cry , " i be a most wicked woman . but it be bad enough that one should misuse you . ! i will see that there be not a second one . " " , nay , no one have misuse me , " he answer . " but the fault lie in your hot and bitter word . you have call her a baggage and a , and i know not what . " " and you be he who teach me to speak the truth , " she cry . " now i have speak it , and yet i can please you . she be , and i shall call her . " such be a sample of the sudden which mar the peace of that little class . as the week pass , however , they become few and less violent , as 's firm and constant nature gain sway and influence over the . and yet , sooth to say , there be time when he have to ask himself whether it be not the who be gain sway and influence over him . if she be change , so be he . in draw her up from the world , he be day by day be himself drag down towards it . in vain he strive and reason with himself as to the madness of let his mind rest upon 's daughter . what be young son , a penniless clerk , a squire unable to pay for his own he should dare to raise his eye to the fair maid in ? so speak reason ; but , in spite of all , her voice be ever in his ear and her image in his heart . strong than reason , strong than cloister teaching , strong than all that might hold him back , be that old , old tyrant who will brook no rival in the kingdom of youth . and yet it be a surprise and a shock to himself to find how deeply she have enter into his life ; how completely those vague ambition and yearning which have fill his spiritual nature centre themselves now upon this thing of earth . he have scarce dare to face the change which have come upon him , when a few sudden chance word show it all up hard and clear , like a lightning flash in the darkness . he have ride over to , one day , with his , , in quest of certain from , the armorer . the day for their departure have almost come , and the two youth spur it over the lonely down at the top of their speed on their homeward course , for evening have fall and there be much to be do . be a hard , wiry , brown face , lad who look on the come war as the schoolboy look on his holiday . this day , however , he have be sombre and mute , with scarce a word a mile to bestow upon his comrade . " tell me , " he break out , suddenly , as they clatter along the wind track which lead over the hill , " have it not seem to you that of late the be pale and more silent than be her wont ? " " it may be so , " the other answer shortly . " and would rather sit distrait by her oriel than ride to the chase as of old . methinks , , it be this learning which you have teach her that have take all the life and sap from her . it be more than she can master , like a heavy spear to a light rider . " " her have so order it , " say . " by our ! and disrespect , " quoth , " it be in my mind that her be more fitted to lead a company to a storm than to have the upbringing of this tender and milk-white maid . , lad , to what i never tell man or woman yet . i love the fair , and would give the last drop of my heart 's blood to serve her . " he speak with a gasp voice , and his face flush crimson in the moonlight . say nothing , but his heart seem to turn to a lump of ice in his bosom . " my father have broad acre , " the other continued , " from to the slope of the . there be fill of grange , hew of wood , malt of grain , and herd of sheep as much as heart could wish , and i the only son . sure be i that would be blithe at such a match . " " but how of the lady ? " ask , with dry lip . " ah , lad , there lie my trouble . it be a toss of the head and a droop of the eye if i say one word of what be in my mind . ' as easy to woo the that we shape last winter in our castle yard . i do but ask her for her green veil , that i might bear it as a token or lambrequin upon my helm ; but she flash out at me that she keep it for a good man , and then all in a breath ask pardon for that she have spoke so rudely . yet she would not take back the word either , nor would she grant the veil . have it seem to , , that she love any one ? " " nay , i can say , " say , with a wild throb of sudden hope in his heart . " i have think so , and yet i can name the man . indeed , save myself , and , and you , who be half a clerk , and of the priory , and the page , who be there whom she see ? " " i can tell , " quoth shortly ; and the two squire ride on again , each intent upon his own thought . next day at morning lesson the teacher observe that his pupil be indeed look pale and jaded , with listless eye and a weary manner . he be heavy-hearted to note the grievous change in her . " your mistress , i fear , be ill , , " he say to the , when the have seek her chamber . the maid look aslant at him with laugh eye . " it be not an illness that kill , " quoth she . " not ! " he cry . " but tell me , , what it be that ail her ? " " methinks that i could lay my hand upon another who be smite with the same trouble , " say she , with the same sidelong look . " not give a name to it , and thou so skilled in ? " " , save that she seem . " " well , bethink you that it be but three day ere you will all be go , and be as dull as the priory . be there not enough there to cloud a lady 's brow ? " " in sooth , yes , " he answer ; " i have forget that she be about to lose her father . " " her father ! " cry the , with a little trill of laughter . " oh simple , simple ! " and she be off down the passage like arrow from bow , while stand gaze after her , betwixt hope and doubt , scarce daring to put faith in the meaning which seem to underlie her word . 's day have come and have go , and it be in the season of , when the ox be drive in to the slaughter , that the company be ready for its journey . shriek the brazen bugle from keep and from gateway , and merry be the rattle of the , as the man gather in the outer bailey , with torch to light them , for the morn have not yet break . , from the window of the armory , look down upon the strange circle of yellow flicker light , the line of stern and bearded face , the quick shimmer of arm , and the lean head of the horse . in front stand the , ten deep , with a fringe of , who pace hither and thither marshal the rank with curt precept or short rebuke . behind be the little clump of steel-clad horseman , their lance raise , with long droop down the oaken shaft . so silent and still be they , that they might have be statue , be it not for the occasional quick , impatient stamp of their charger , or the rattle of chamfron against as they toss and strain . a spear 's length in front of them sit the spare and long-limbed figure of , the fighting man , his fierce , face frame in steel , and the silk guidon mark with the five scarlet rose slant over his right shoulder . all round , in the edge of the circle of the light , stand the castle servant , the soldier who be to form the garrison , and little knot of woman , who sob in their apron and call shrilly to their to watch over the , or , or who have turn his hand to the work of war . the young squire be lean forward , gaze at the stirring and martial scene , when he hear a short , quick gasp at his shoulder , and there be the , with her hand to her heart , lean up against the wall , slender and fair , like a lily . her face be turn away from him , but he could see , by the sharp intake of her breath , that she be weep bitterly . " alas ! alas ! " he cry , all unnerve at the sight , " why be it that you be so sad , lady ? " " it be the sight of these brave man , " she answer ; " and to think how many of them go and how few be like to find their way back . i have see it before , when i be a little maid , in the year of the 's great battle . i remember then how they muster in the bailey , even as they do now , and my hold me in her arm at this very window that i might see the show . " " please , you will see them all back ere another year be out , " say he . she shake her head , look round at him with flush cheek and eye that sparkle in the . " oh , but i hate myself for be a woman ! " she cry , with a stamp of her little foot . " what can i do that be good ? here i must bide , and talk and sew and spin , and spin and sew and talk . ever the same dull round , with nothing at the end of it . and now you be go too , who could carry my thought out of these gray wall , and raise my mind above tapestry and distaff . what can i do ? i be of no more use or value than that break . " " you be of such value to me , " he cry , in a whirl of hot , passionate word , " that all else have become nought . you be my heart , my life , my one and only think . oh , , i can live without you , i can leave you without a word of love . all be change to me since i have know you . i be poor and lowly and all unworthy of you ; but if great love may weigh down such defect , then mine may do it . give me but one word of hope to take to the war with one . ah , you shrink , you shudder ! my wild word have frighten you . " twice she open her lip , and twice no sound come from them . at last she speak in a hard and measured voice , as one who dare not trust herself to speak too freely . " this be over sudden , " she say ; " it be not so long since the world be nothing to you . you have change once ; perchance you may change again . " " cruel ! " he cry , " who have change me ? " " and then your brother , " she continue with a little laugh , disregard his question . " methinks this have become a family custom amongst the . nay , i be sorry ; i do not mean a jibe . but , indeed , , this have come suddenly upon me , and i scarce know what to say . " " say some word of hope , however kind word that i may cherish in my heart . " " , , it be a cruel kindness , and you have be too good and true a friend to me that i should use you despitefully . there can be a close link between us . it be madness to think of it . be there no other reason , it be enough that my father and your brother would both cry out against it . " " my brother , what have he to do with it ? and your father -- -- -- " " , , be it not you who would have me act fairly to all man , and , certes , to my father amongst them ? " " you say truly , " he cry , " you say truly . but you do not reject me , ? you give me some ray of hope ? i do not ask pledge or promise . say only that i be not hateful to on some happy day i may hear kind word from you . " her eye soften upon him , and a kind answer be on her lip , when a hoarse shout , with the clatter of arm and stamp of steed , rise up from the bailey below . at the sound her face set her eye sparkle , and she stand with flush cheek and head throw woman 's body , with a soul of fire . " my father have go down , " she cry . " your place be by his side . nay , look not at me , . it be no time for dally . win my father 's love , and all may follow . it be when the brave soldier have do his that he hope for his reward . farewell , and may be with you ! " she hold out her white , slim hand to him , but as he bend his lip over it she whisk away and be go , leave in his outstretch hand the very green veil for which poor have crave in vain . again the hoarse cheer burst out from below , and he hear the clang of the rise portcullis . press the veil to his lip , he thrust it into the bosom of his tunic , and rush as fast as foot could bear him to arm himself and join the muster . the raw morning have break ere the hot spice ale have be serve round and the last farewell speak . a cold wind blow up from the sea and ragged cloud drift swiftly across the sky . the townsfolk stand huddle about the of , the woman pull tight their shawl and the man swathe themselves in their gaberdine , while down the wind path from the castle come the van of the little army , their foot clang on the hard , frozen road . come with his banner , bestride a lean and powerful charger , as hard and wiry and as himself . after him , ride three abreast , be nine man-at-arms , all pick soldier , who have follow the french war before , and know the march of as they know the down of their native . they be arm to the tooth with lance , sword , and mace , with square shield notch at the upper right-hand corner to serve as a . for defence each man wear a coat of interlace leathern thong , strengthen at the shoulder , elbow , and upper arm with slip of steel . greave and be also of leather back by steel , and their gauntlet and shoe be of iron plate , craftily joint . so , with jingle of arm and clatter of hoof , they ride across the of , while the burgher shout lustily for the flag of the five rose and its gallant guard . close at the heel of the horse come archer bearded and burly , their round target on their back and their long yellow bow , the most deadly weapon that the wit of man have yet devise , thrust forth from behind their shoulder . from each man 's girdle hang sword or axe , accord to his humor , and over the right hip there jut out the leathern quiver with its bristle of goose , pigeon , and peacock feather . behind the bowman stride two trumpeter blow upon , and two drummer in clothes . after them come sumpter horse carry , cloth , spare arm , spur , wedge , cook kettle , , bag of nail and the hundred other thing which experience have show to be needful in a harry and hostile country . a white mule with red trapping , lead by a varlet , carry 's own napery and table comfort . then come more archer , ten more man-at-arms , and finally a rear guard of twenty bowman , with big towering in the front rank and the veteran march by the side , his battered harness and fade surcoat in strange contrast with the snow-white jupon and shine brigandine of his companion . a quick of greeting and question and rough west saxon jest fly from rank to rank , or be bandy about betwixt the march archer and the gaze crowd . " , ! " cry , as he spy the portly figure of the village innkeeper . " no more of nut-brown , gar . we leave it behind us . " " by , no ! " cry the other . " you take it with you . devil a drop have you leave in the great kilderkin . it be time for you to go . " " if your cask be lee , i warrant your purse be full , gaffer , " shout . " see that you lie in good store of the good for our . " " see that you keep your throat whole for the drinking of it arch , " cry a voice , and the crowd laugh at the rough pleasantry . " if you will warrant the beer , i will warrant the throat , " say composedly . " close up the rank ! " cry . " en avant , mes enfants ! ah , by my finger bone , there be my sweet from the ! , but she be beautiful ! adieu , ma ! a . brace your belt , , man , and swing your shoulder as a free companion should . by my hilt ! your jerkin will be as dirty as mine ere you clap eye on again . " the company have march to the turn of the road ere ride out from the gateway , mount on , his great black war-horse , whose ponderous footfall on the wooden drawbridge echo loudly from the gloomy arch which span it . be still in his velvet dress of peace , with flat velvet cap of maintenance , and curl ostrich feather clasp in a golden brooch . to his three squire ride behind him it look as though he bear the bird 's egg as well as its feather , for the back of his bald pate shine like a globe of ivory . he bear no arm save the long and heavy sword which hang at his ; but carry in front of him the high bassinet , the heavy ash spear with pennon , while be entrust with the emblazon shield . the ride her palfrey at her lord 's , for she would see him as far as the edge of the forest , and ever and anon she turn her face up wistfully to him and run a questioning eye over his apparel and appointment . " i trust that there be nothing forget , " she say , beckon to to ride on her further side . " i trust him to you , . hosen , shirt , , and be in the brown basket on the leave side of the mule . his wine he take hot when the night be cold , malvoisie or , with as much spice as would cover the . see that he have a change if he come back hot from the tilt . there be in a box , if the old scar ache at the turn of the weather . let his blanket be dry and -- -- -- " " , my heart 's life , " the little knight interrupt , " trouble not now about such matter . why so pale and wan , ? be it not enow to make a man 's heart dance to see this noble company , such valiant man-at-arms , such lusty archer ? by ! i would be ill to please if i be not blithe to see the red rose fly at the head of so noble a following ! " " the purse i have already give you , , " continue the lady . " there be in it mark , one noble , three shilling and fourpence , which be a great treasure for one man to carry . and i pray you to bear in mind , , that he have two pair of shoe , those of red leather for common use , and the other with golden , which he may wear should he chance to drink wine with the or with . " " my sweet bird , " say , " i be right loth to part from you , but we be now at the fringe of the forest , and it be not right that i should take the chatelaine too far from her trust . " " but oh , my dear lord , " she cry with a tremble lip , " let me bide with you for one furlong one and a half perhaps . you may spare me this out of the weary mile that you will journey along . " " come , then , my heart 's comfort , " he answer . " but i must crave a gage from . it be my custom , , and have be since i have first know , to proclaim by herald in such camp , township , or fortalice as i may chance to visit , that my , be beyond compare the fair and sweet in , i should deem it great honor and kindly condescension if any cavalier would run three course against me with sharpen lance , should he chance to have a lady whose claim he be willing to advance . i pray you then my fair dove , that you will vouchsafe to me one of those doeskin glove , that i may wear it as the badge of her whose servant i shall ever be . " " and alas for the fair and sweet ! " she cry . " fair and sweet i would fain be for your dear sake , my lord , but old i be and ugly , and the knight would laugh should you lay lance in rest in such a cause . " " , " quoth , " you have young eye , and mine be somewhat bedim . should you chance to see a knight laugh , or smile , or even , look you , arch his brow , or purse his mouth , or in any way show surprise that i should uphold the , you will take particular note of his name , his , and his lodging . your glove , my life 's desire ! " the slip her hand from her yellow leather gauntlet , and he , lift it with dainty reverence , bind it to the front of his velvet " it be with mine other guardian angel , " quoth he , point at the saint ' medal which hang beside it . " and now , my dear , you have come far enow . may the guard and prosper ! one kiss ! " he bend down from his saddle , and then , striking spur into his horse 's side , he gallop at top speed after his man , with his three squire at his heel . half a mile further , where the road top a hill , they look back , and the on her white palfrey be still where they have leave her . a moment later they be on the downward slope , and she have vanish from their view . for a time be very moody and downcast , with bent brow and eye upon the pommel of his saddle . and ride behind him in little good case , while , a careless and light-hearted youth , grin at the melancholy of his companion , and flourish his lord 's heavy spear , make a point to right and a point to left , as though he be a paladin contend against a host of assailant . happen , however , to turn himself in his instantly become as stiff and as rigid as though he have be strike with a palsy . the four ride alone , for the archer have pass a curve in the road , though could still hear the heavy clump , clump of their march , or catch a glimpse of the sparkle of steel through the tangle of leafless branch . " ride by my side , friend , i entreat of you , " say the knight , rein in his steed that they might come abreast of him . " for , since it have please you to follow me to the war , it be well that you should know how you may well serve me . i doubt not , , that you will show yourself a worthy son of a valiant father ; and you , , of yours ; and you , , that you be mindful of the old-time house from which all man know that you be spring . and first i would have you bear very steadfastly in mind that our setting forth be by no means for the purpose of gain spoil or exacting ransom , though it may well happen that such may come to us also . we go to , and from thence i trust to , in humble search of a field in which we may win advancement and perchance some small share of glory . for this purpose i would have you know that it be not my wont to let any occasion pass where it be in any way possible that honor may be gain . i would have you bear this in mind , and give great heed to it that you may bring me word of all cartel , challenge , wrong , tyranny , infamy , and wrong of damsel . nor be any occasion too small to take note of , for i have know such trifle as the drop of a gauntlet , or the flick of a breadcrumb , when well and properly follow up , lead to a most noble . but , , do i not see a cavalier who ride down yonder road amongst the nether shaw ? it would be well , perchance , that you should give him greet from me . and , should he be of gentle blood it may be that he would care to exchange thrust with me . " " why , my lord , " quoth , standing in his stirrup and shade his eye , " it be old , the fat miller of ! " " ah , so it be , indeed , " say , pucker his cheek ; " but wayside venture be not to be scorn , for i have see no fine passage than be to be have from such chance meeting , when cavalier be willing to advance themselves . i can well remember that two league from the town of i meet a very valiant and courteous cavalier of , with whom i have gentle and most honorable contention for upwards of an hour . it have ever grieve me that i have not his name , for he smite upon me with a mace and go upon his way ere i be in condition to have much speech with him ; but his arm be an in chief above a fess azure . i be also on such an occasion thrust through the shoulder by , whom i meet on the high road betwixt and . i meet him but the once , but i have never see a man for whom i bear a great love and esteem . and so also with the squire , who would have be a very valiant captain have he live . " " he be dead then ? " ask . " alas ! it be my ill fate to slay him in a bickering which break out in a field near the township of . i can call to mind how the thing come about , for it be in the year of the 's ride through , when there be much fine skirmish to be have at barrier . by ! i do not think that any honorable cavalier could ask for good chance of advancement than might be have by spur forth before the army and ride to the gateway of , or or , where some courteous gentleman would ever be at wait to do what he might to meet your wish or ease you of your vow . such a one at run three course with me betwixt daybreak and sunrise , to the great exaltation of his lady . " " and do you slay him also , my lord ? " ask with reverence . " i could never learn , for he be carry within the barrier , and as i have chance to break the bone of my leg it be a great unease for me to ride or even to stand . yet , by the goodness of heaven and the pious intercession of the valiant , i be able to sit my charger in the ruffle of , which be no very long time afterwards . but what have we here ? a very fair and courtly maiden , or i mistake . " it be indeed a tall and buxom country lass , with a basket of upon her head , and a great slab of bacon tuck under one arm . she bob a frightened curtsey as sweep his velvet hat from his head and rein up his great charger . " god be with , fair maiden ! " say he . " guard , my lord ! " she answer , speak in the broad west saxon speech , and balance herself first on one foot and then on the other in her bashfulness . " fear not , my fair damsel , " say , " but tell me if perchance a poor and most unworthy knight can in any wise be of service to you . should it chance that you have be use despitefully , it may be that i may obtain justice for you . " " no , kind sir , " she answer , clutch her bacon the tight , as though some design upon it might be hide under this knightly offer . " i be the milk wench o ' , and he be as kind a as heart could wish . " " it be well , " say he , and with a shake of the bridle ride on down the woodland path . " i would have you bear in mind , " he continue to his squire , " that gentle courtesy be not , as be the base use of so many false knight , to be show only to maiden of high degree , for there be no woman so humble that a true knight may not listen to her tale of wrong . but here come a cavalier who be indeed in haste . perchance it would be well that we should ask him whither he ride , for it may be that he be one who desire to advance himself in chivalry . " the bleak , hard , wind-swept road dip down in front of them into a little valley , and then , writhe up the heathy slope upon the other side , lose itself among the gaunt . far away between the black line of trunk the quick glitter of steel mark where the company pursue its way . to the north stretch the tree country , but to the south , between two swell down , a glimpse might be catch of the cold gray shimmer of the sea , with the white fleck of a galley sail upon the distant . just in front of the traveller a horseman be urge his steed up the slope , drive it on with whip and spur as one who ride for a set purpose . as he clatter up , could see that the roan horse be gray with dust and fleck with foam , as though it have leave many a mile behind it . the rider be a man , hard of mouth and dry of eye , with a heavy sword clank at his side , and a stiff white bundle swathe in linen balance across the pommel of his saddle . " the king 's messenger , " he bawl as he come up to them . " the messenger of the king . clear the causeway for the king 's own man . " " not so loudly , friend , " quoth the little knight , rein his horse half round to bar the path . " i have myself be the king 's man for thirty year or more , but i have not be wont to halloo about it on a peaceful highway . " " i ride in his service , " cry the other , " and i carry that which belong to him . you bar my path at your peril . " " yet i have know the king 's enemy claim to ride in his same , " say . " the foul fiend may lurk beneath a garment of light . we must have some sign or warrant of your mission . " " then must i hew a passage , " cry the stranger , with his shoulder brace round and his hand upon his hilt . " i be not to be stop on the king 's service by every gadabout . " " should you be a gentleman of quartering and , " lisp , " i shall be very blithe to go further into the matter with you . if not , i have three very worthy squire , any one of whom would take the thing upon himself , and debate it with you in a very honorable way . " the man scowl from one to the other , and his hand steal away from his sword . " you ask me for a sign , " he say . " here be a sign for you , since you must have one . " as he speak he whirl the covering from the object in front of him and show to their horror that it be a human leg . " by 's tooth ! " he continue , with a brutal laugh , " you ask me if i be a man of quartering , and it be even so , for i be officer to the verderer 's court at . this thievish leg be to hang at , and the other be already at , as a sign to all man of what come of be over-fond of venison pasty . " " ! " cry . " pass on the other side of the road , fellow , and let us have the wind of you . we shall trot our horse , my friend , across this pleasant valley , for , by our ! a breath of 's fresh air be right welcome after such a sight . " " we hope to snare a falcon , " say he presently , " but we net a carrion-crow . ! but there be man whose heart be tough than a boar 's hide . for me , i have play the old game of war since ever i have hair on my chin , and i have see ten thousand brave man in one day with their face to the sky , but i swear by who make me that i can abide the work of the butcher . " " and yet , my fair lord , " say , " there have , from what i hear , be much of such devil 's work in . " " too much , too much , " he answer . " but i have ever observe that the foremost in the field be they who would scorn to mishandle a prisoner . by ! it be not they who carry the breach who be wont to sack the town , but the laggard knave who come crowd in when a way have be clear for them . but what be this among the tree ? " " it be a shrine of our , " say , " and a blind beggar who live by the alms of those who worship there . " " a shrine ! " cry the knight . " then let us put up an orison . " pull off his cap , and clasp his hand , he chant in a shrill voice : " meu , qui manus ad , et ad . " a strange figure he seem to his three squire , perch on his huge horse , with his eye upturn and the wintry sun shimmer upon his bald head . " it be a noble prayer , " he remark , put on his hat again , " and it be teach to me by the noble himself . but how fare it with you , father ? methinks that i should have ruth upon you , see that i be myself like one who look through a horn window while his neighbor have the clear crystal . yet , by ! there be a long stride between the man who have a horn casement and him who be wall in on every hand . " " alas ! fair sir , " cry the blind old man , " i have not see the bless blue of heaven this year , since a levin flash burn the sight out of my head . " " you have be blind to much that be goodly and fair , " quoth , " but you have also be spare much that be sorry and foul . this very hour our eye have be shock with that which would have leave you unmoved . but , by ! we must on , or our company will think that they have lose their captain somewhat early in the venture . throw the man my purse , , and let us go . " , linger behind , bethink him of the 's counsel , and reduce the noble gift which the knight have so freely bestow to a single penny , which the beggar with many mumble blessing thrust away into his wallet . then , spur his steed , the young squire ride at the top of his speed after his companion , and overtake them just at the spot where the tree fringe off into the moor and the straggle hamlet of lie scatter on either side of the winding and track . the company be already well-nigh through the village ; but , as the knight and his squire close up upon them , they hear the clamor of a strident voice , follow by a roar of laughter from the rank of the archer . another minute bring them up with the rear-guard , where every man march with his beard on his shoulder and a face which be with merriment . by the side of the column walk a huge red-headed bowman , with his hand throw out in argument and expostulation , while close at his heel follow a little wrinkle woman who pour forth a shrill volley of abuse , vary by an occasional thwack from her stick , give with all the force of her body , though she might have be beat one of the forest tree for all the effect that she seem likely to produce . " i trust , , " say gravely , as he ride up , " that this do not mean that any violence have be offer to woman . if such a thing happen , i tell you that the man shall hang , though he be the good archer that ever wear brassart . " " , my fair lord , " answer with a grin , " it be violence which be offer to a man . he come from , and this be his mother who have come forth to welcome him . " " you , " she be howl , with a blow between each catch of her breath , " you , , . i will teach ! i will baste ! aye , by my faith ! " " whist , mother , " say , look back at her from the tail of his eye , " i go to as an archer to give blow and to take them . " " to , ? " cry the old dame . " bide here with me , and i shall warrant you more blow than you be like to get in . if blow be what you seek , you need not go further than . " " by my hilt ! the good dame speak truth , " say . " it seem to be the very home of them . " " what have you to say , you ? " cry the fiery dame , turn upon the archer . " can i not speak with my own son but you must let your tongue clack ? a soldier , , and never a hair on his face . i have see a good soldier with pap for food and swaddle clothes for harness . " " stand to it , , " cry the archer , amid a fresh burst of laughter . " do not thwart her , comrade , " say big . " she have a proper spirit for her year and can abide to be thwart . it be kindly and homely to me to hear her voice and to feel that she be behind me . but i must leave you now , mother , for the way be for your foot ; but i will bring you back a silken gown , if there be one in or , and i will bring a silver penny ; so good-bye to you , and have you in his keep ! " whip up the little woman , he lift her lightly to his lip , and then , take his place in the rank again , march on with the laughing company . " that be ever his way , " she cry , appeal to , who rein up his horse and listen with the great courtesy . " he would jog on his own road for all that i could do to change him . first he must be a monk forsooth , and all because a wench be wise enough to turn her back on him . then he join a rascally crew and must needs off to the war , and me with no one to bait the fire if i be out , or tend the cow if i be home . yet i have be a good mother to him . three hazel switch a day have i break across his shoulder , and he take no more notice than you have see him . " " doubt not that he will come back to you both safe and prosperous , my fair dame , " quoth . " meanwhile it grieve me that as i have already give my purse to a beggar up the road i -- -- -- " " , my lord , " say , " i still have some money remain . " " then i pray you to give them to this very worthy woman . " he canter on as he speak , while , have dispense two more pence , leave the old dame standing by the furthest cottage of , with her shrill voice raise in blessing instead of . there be two before they reach the , and at each of then pull up his horse , and wait with many a curvet and , crane his neck this way and that to see if fortune would send him a venture . crossroad have , as he explain , be rare place for knightly , and in his youth it be no uncommon thing for a cavalier to abide for week at such a point , hold gentle debate with all comer , to his own advancement and the great honor of his lady . the time be change , however , and the forest track wind away from them desert and silent , with no trample of war-horse or clang of armor which might herald the approach of an that ride on his way disconsolate . at the they splash through the ford , and lie in the meadow on the further side to eat the bread and salt meat which they carry upon the sumpter horse . then , ere the sun be on the slope of the heaven , they have deftly truss up again , and be swing merrily upon their way , two hundred foot move like two . there be a third where the track from run down to the old fishing village of 's . down this , as they come abreast of it , there walk two man , the one a pace or two behind the other . the cavalier could not but pull up their horse to look at them , for a stranger pair be never see journey together . the first be a misshapen , squalid man with cruel , cunning eye and a shock of tangled red hair , bear in his hand a small unpainted cross , which he hold high so that all man might see it . he seem to be in the last extremity of fright , with a face the color of clay and his limb all as one who have an ague . behind him , with his toe ever rasp upon the other 's heel , there walk a very stern , man with a hard eye and a set mouth . he bear over his shoulder a great knotted stick with three jagged nail stick in the head of it , and from time to time he whirl it up in the air with a quiver arm , as though he could scarce hold back from dash his companion 's brain out . so in silence they walk under the spread of the branch on the path from . " by ! " quoth the knight , " but this be a pass strange sight , and perchance some very perilous and honorable venture may arise from it . i pray you , , to ride up to them and to ask them the cause of it . " there be no need , however , for him to move , for the twain come swiftly towards them until they be within a spear 's length , when the man with the cross sit himself down sullenly upon a tussock of grass by the wayside , while the other stand beside him with his great cudgel still hang over his head . so intent be he that he raise his eye neither to knight nor squire , but keep them ever fix with a savage glare upon his comrade . " i pray you , friend , " say , " to tell us truthfully who you be , and why you follow this man with such bitter enmity ? " " so long as i be within the pale of the king 's law , " the stranger answer , " i can see why i should render account to every pass wayfarer . " " you be no very shrewd , fellow , " quoth the knight ; " for if it be within the law for you to threaten him with your club , then it be also lawful for me to threaten you with my sword . " the man with the cross be down in an instant on his knee upon the ground , with hand clasp above him and his face shine with hope . " for dear 's sake , my fair lord , " he cry in a crackling voice , " i have at my belt a bag with a hundred rise noble , and i will give it to you freely if you will but pass your sword through this man 's body . " " how , you foul knave ? " exclaim hotly . " do you think that a cavalier 's arm be to be buy like a 's ware . by ! i have little doubt that this fellow have some very good cause to hold you in hatred . " " indeed , my fair sir , you speak sooth , " quoth he with the club , while the other seat himself once more by the wayside . " for this man be , a very note , , and murtherer , who have wrought much evil for many year in the part about . it be but the other day , upon the feast of the bless and , that he slay my young brother in which , by the black thorn of ! i shall have his heart 's blood , though i walk behind him to the further end of earth . " " but if this be indeed so , " ask , " why be it that you have come with him so far through the forest ? " " because i be an honest englishman , and will take no more than the law allow . for when the deed be do this foul and base wretch flee to sanctuary at , and i , as you may think , after him with all the posse . the prior , however , have so order that while he hold this cross no man may lay hand upon him without the ban of church , which heaven forfend from me or mine . yet , if for an instant he lie the cross aside , or if he fail to journey to 's , where it be order that he shall take ship to outland part , or if he take not the first ship , or if until the ship be ready he walk not every day into the sea as far as his loin , then he become outlaw , and i shall forthwith dash out his brain . " at this the man on the ground snarl up at him like a rat , while the other clench his tooth , and shake his club , and look down at him with murder in his eye . knight and squire gaze from rogue to avenger , but as it be a matter which none could mend they tarry no longer , but ride upon their way . , look back , see that the murderer have draw bread and cheese from his scrip , and be silently munch it , with the protect cross still hug to his breast , while the other , black and grim , stand in the sunlit road and throw his dark shadow athwart him . that night the company sleep at 's , in the great monastic barn and well know both to and to , for they be almost within sight of the of . a strange thrill it give to the young squire to see the well-remember white dress once more , and to hear the measure toll of the deep vespers bell . at early dawn they pass across the broad , sluggish , , horse , and baggage in the flat ferry so journey on through the fresh morning air past to . top the heathy down , they come of a sudden full in sight of the old cluster of house , a trail of blue smoke , and a bristle of mast . to right and leave the long blue curve of the lap in a fringe of foam upon the yellow beach . some way out from the town a line of , , and other small craft be roll lazily on the gentle swell . further out still lay a great , high end , deep waisted , paint of a canary yellow , and towering above the like a swan among duckling . " by ! " say the knight , " our good merchant of have not play us false , for methinks i can see our ship down yonder . he say that she would be of great size and of a yellow shade . " " by my hilt , yes ! " mutter ; " she be yellow as a kite 's claw , and would carry as many man as there be pip in a pomegranate . " " it be as well , " remark ; " for methinks , my fair lord , that we be not the only one who be wait a passage to . mine eye catch at time a flash and sparkle among yonder house which assuredly never come from shipman 's jacket or the gaberdine of a burgher . " " i can also see it , " say , shade his eye with his hand . " and i can see man-at-arms in yonder boat which ply betwixt the vessel and the shore . but methinks that we be very welcome here , for already they come forth to meet us . " a tumultuous crowd of fisherman , citizen , and woman have indeed swarm out from the northern gate , and approach them up the side of the moor , wave their hand and dance with joy , as though a great fear have be roll back from their mind . at their head ride a very large and solemn man with a long chin and a droop lip . he wear a fur tippet round his neck and a heavy gold chain over it , with a medallion which dangle in front of him . " welcome , most puissant and noble lord , " he cry , doff his bonnet to . " i have hear of your lordship 's valiant deed , and in sooth they might be expect from your lordship 's face and bearing . be there any small matter in which i may oblige you ? " " since you ask me , " say the man-at-arms , " i would take it kindly if you could spare a link or two of the chain which hang round your neck . " " what , the corporation chain ! " cry the other in horror . " the ancient chain of the township of ! this be but a sorry jest , . " " what the plague do you ask me for then ? " say . " but if it be with whom you would speak , that be he upon the black horse . " the of gaze with amazement on the mild face and slender frame of the famous warrior . " your pardon , my gracious lord , " he cry . " you see in me the mayor and chief magistrate of the ancient and powerful town of . i bid you very heartily welcome , and the more so as you be come at a moment when we be sore put to it for mean of defence . " " ! " cry , prick up his ear . " yes , my lord , for the town be very ancient and the wall as old as the town , it follow that they be very ancient too . but there be a certain villainous and bloodthirsty pirate hight , who , with a call , commonly know as , have be a mighty scourge upon these coast . indeed , my lord , they be very cruel and man , graceless and ruthless , and if they should come to the ancient and powerful town of -- " " then good-bye to the ancient and powerful town of , " quoth , whose lightness of tongue could at time rise above his awe of . the knight , however , be too much intent upon the matter in hand to give heed to the flippancy of his squire . " have you then cause , " he ask , " to think that these man be about to venture an attempt upon you ? " " they have come in two great galley , " answer the mayor , " with two bank of oar on either side , and great store of engine of war and of man-at-arms . at and at they have murder and ravish . yesterday morning they be at , and we see the smoke from the burning croft . they lie at their ease near , and we fear much lest they come upon us and do us a mischief . " " we can tarry , " say , ride towards the town , with the mayor upon his left side ; " the await us at , and we may not be behind the general muster . yet i will promise you that on our way we shall find time to pass and to prevail upon these rover to leave you in peace . " " we be much beholden to you ! " cry the mayor " but i can see , my lord , how , without a , you may venture against these man . with your archer , however , you might well hold the town and do them great if they attempt to land . " " there be a very proper cog out yonder , " say , " it would be a very strange thing if any ship be not a when it have such man as these upon her deck . certes , we shall do as i say , and that no later than this very day . " " my lord , " say a , man , who walk by the knight 's other stirrup , with his head slope to catch all that he be say . " by your leave , i have no doubt that you be skilled in land fighting and the marshal of lance , but , by my soul ! you will find it another thing upon the sea . i be the of this yellow cog , and my name be . i have sail since i be as high as this staff , and i have fight against these and against the genoese , as well as the scotch , the , the spanish , and the moor . i tell you , sir , that my ship be over light and over frail for such work , and it will but end in our have our throat cut , or be sell as slave to the heathen . " " i also have experience one or two gentle and honorable venture upon the sea , " quoth , " and i be right blithe to have so fair a task before us . i think , good , that you and i may win great honor in this matter , and i can see very readily that you be a brave and stout man . " " i like it not , " say the other sturdily . " in 's name , i like it not . and yet be not the man to stand back when his fellow be for press forward . by my soul ! be it sink or swim , i shall turn her beak into , and if good , of , like not my handling of his ship then he may find another . " they be close by the old north gate of the little town , and , half turning in his saddle , look back at the motley crowd who follow . the bowman and man-at-arms have break their rank and be intermingle with the fisherman and citizen , whose laughing face and hearty gesture bespeak the weight of care from which this welcome arrival have relieve them . here and there among the move throng of dark jerkin and of white surcoat be scatter dash of scarlet and blue , the or shawl of the woman . , with a fishing lass on either arm , be vow constancy alternately to her on the right and her on the left , while big towered in the rear with a little chubby maiden enthrone upon his great shoulder , her soft white arm curl round his shine headpiece . so the throng move on , until at the very gate it be bring to a stand by a wondrously fat man , who come dart forth from the town with rage in every feature of his rubicund face . " how now , ? " he roar , in a voice like a bull . " how now , ? how of the clam and the scallop ? " " by our ! my sweet , " cry the mayor . " i have have so much to think of , with these wicked villain so close upon us , that it have quite go out of my head . " " word , word ! " shout the other furiously . " be i to be put off with word ? i say to you again , how of the clam and scallop ? " " my fair sir , you flatter me , " cry the mayor . " i be a peaceful trader , and i be not wont to be so shout at upon so small a matter . " " small ! " shriek the other . " small ! clam and scallop ! ask me to your table to partake of the dainty of the town , and when i come a barren welcome and a bare board ! where be my ? " " , , ! " cry , laugh . " let your anger be appease , since instead of this dish you come upon an old friend and comrade . " " by of ! " shout the fat knight , his wrath all change in an instant to joy , " if it be not my dear little game rooster of the . ah , my sweet coz , i be right glad to see you . what day we have see together ! " " , by my faith , " cry , with sparkling eye , " we have see some valiant man , and we have show our pennon in some noble skirmish . by ! we have have great joy in . " " and sorrow also , " quoth the other . " i have some sad memory of the land . can you recall that which befall us at ? " " nay , i can call to mind that we ever so much as draw sword at the place . " " man , man , " cry , " your mind still run on nought but blade and bassinet . no space in frame for the soft joy . ah , even now i can scarce speak of it unmoved . so noble a pie , such tender pigeon , and sugar in the gravy instead of salt ! you be by my side that day , as be and the of . " " i remember it , " say , laugh , " and how you harry the cook down the street , and speak of set fire to the inn . by ! most worthy mayor , my old friend be a perilous man , and i rede you that you compose your difference with him on such term as you may . " " the clam and scallop shall be ready within the hour , " the mayor answer . " i have ask to do my humble board the honor to partake at it of the dainty upon which we take some little pride , but in sooth this alarm of pirate have cast such a shadow on my wit that i be like one distrait . but i trust , , that you will also partake of with me ? " " i have overmuch to do , " answer , " for we must be aboard , horse and man , as early as we may . how many do you muster , ? " " three and forty . the forty be drunk , and the three be but indifferent sober . i have them all safe upon the ship . " " they have well find their wit again , for i shall have work for every man of them ere the sun set . it be my intention , if it seem good to you , to try a venture against these and genoese rover . " " they carry caviare and certain very noble spice from the aboard of ship from , " quoth . " we may come to great profit through the business . i pray you , , that when you go on board you pour a of sea-water over any of my rogue whom you may see there . " leave the lusty knight and the of , lead the company straight down to the water 's edge , where long line of flat lighter swiftly bear them to their vessel . horse after horse be sling by main force up from the barge , and after kick and plunge in empty air be drop into the deep waist of the yellow cog , where row of stall stand ready for their safe keeping . englishman in those day be skilled and prompt in such matter , for it be so not long before that have embark as many as fifty thousand man in the port of , with their horse and their baggage , all in the space of hour . so urgent be on the shore , and so prompt be on the cog , that have scarce swallow his last scallop ere the peal of the trumpet and clang of announce that all be ready and the anchor draw . in the last boat which leave the shore the two commander sit together in the sheet , a strange contrast to one another , while under the foot of the rower be a litter of huge stone which have order to be carry to the cog . these once aboard , the ship set her broad mainsail , purple in color , and with a golden bearing upon his shoulder in the centre of it . the breeze blow , the sail belly , over heel the portly vessel , and away she plunge through the smooth blue roller , amid the clang of the minstrel on her poop and the shouting of the black crowd who fringe the yellow beach . to the left lie the green of , with its long , low , curve hill peep over each other 's shoulder to the ; to the right the wooded coast as far as eye could reach ; above a steel-blue heaven , with a wintry sun shimmer down upon them , and enough of frost to set the breath . " by ! " say , as he stand upon the poop and look on either side of him , " it be a land which be very well worth fight for , and it be pity to go to for what may be have at home . do you not spy a crooked man upon the beach ? " " nay , i spy nothing , " grumble , " for i be hurry down with a clam stick in my gizzard and an goblet of on the board behind me . " " i see him , my fair lord , " say , " an old man with one shoulder high than the other . " " ' a sign of good fortune , " quoth . " our path be also cross by a woman and by a priest , so all should be well with us . what say you , ? " " i can tell , my fair lord . the roman of old be a very wise people , yet , certes , they place their faith in such matter . so , too , do the , and diver other ancient people who be fame for their learning . yet of the modern there be many who scoff at all omen . " " there can be no manner of doubt about it , " say . " i can well remember that in one day it thunder on the leave out of a cloudless sky . we know that ill would come of it , nor have we long to wait . only thirteen day after , a haunch of prime venison be carry from my very tent door by the wolf , and on the same day two flask of old turn sour and muddy . " " you may bring my harness from below , " say to his squire , " and also , i pray you , bring up 's and we shall don it here . may then see to your own gear ; for this day you will , i hope , make a very honorable entrance into the field of chivalry , and prove to be very worthy and valiant squire . and now , , as to our disposition : would it please you that i should order them or will you ? " " you , my cockerel , you . by our ! i be no chicken , but i can claim to know as much of war as the squire of . settle the matter to your own liking . " " you shall fly your pennon upon the fore part , then , and i upon the poop . for i shall give you your own forty man , with archer . man , with my own man-at-arms and squire , will serve as a . ten archer , with thirty , under the master , may hold the waist while ten lie aloft with stone and arbalest . how like you that ? " " good , by my faith , good ! but here come my harness , and i must to work , for i can slip into it as i be wont when first i set my face to the war . " meanwhile there have be bustle and preparation in all part of the great vessel . the archer stand in group about the deck , their bow , and test that they be firm at the nock . among them move and other of the old soldier , with a few whisper word of precept here and of warn there . " stand to it , my heart of gold , " say the old bowman as he pass from knot to knot . " by my hilt ! we be in luck this journey . bear in mind the old saying of the company . " " what be that , ? " cry several , lean on their bow and laugh at him . " ' the 's rede : ' every bow well bend . every shaft well send . every stave well nock . every string well lock . ' there , with that jingle in his head , a bracer on his left hand , a shoot glove on his right , and a of wax in his girdle , what more do a bowman need ? " " it would not be amiss , " say , " if under his girdle he have four of wine . " " work first , wine afterwards , . but it be time that we take our order , for methinks that between the rock and the cliff yonder i can catch a glimpse of the topmast of the galley . , , , , your man be of the . , , , , you be with on the forecastle . , you bide with your lord 's banner ; but ten man must go forward . " quietly and promptly the man take their place , lie flat upon their face on the deck , for such be 's order . near the prow be plant 's spear , with his boar 's head gules upon a field of gold . close by the stern stand with the pennon of the house of . in the waist gather the mariner , hairy and burly man , with their jerkin throw off , their waist brace tight , sword , mallet , and pole-axe in their hand . their leader , , stand upon the poop and talk with , cast his eye up sometimes at the swell sail , and then glance back at the two seaman who hold the tiller . " pass the word , " say , " that no man shall stand to arm or draw his until my trumpeter shall sound . it would be well that we should seem to be a from and appear to flee from them . " " we shall see them anon , " say the . " , say i not so ? there they lie , the , in ; and mark the reek of smoke from yonder point , where they have be at their devil 's work . see how their shallop pull from the land ! they have see us and call their man aboard . now they draw upon the anchor . see them like ant upon the forecastle ! they stoop and heave like handy ship man . but , my fair lord , these be no . i doubt but we have take in hand more than we can do . each of these ship be a , and of the large and swift make . " " i would i have your eye , " say , blink at the pirate galley . " they seem very gallant ship , and i trust that we shall have much pleasance from our meeting with them . it would be well to pass the word that we should neither give nor take quarter this day . have you perchance a priest or friar aboard this ship , ? " " no , my fair lord . " " well , well , it be no great matter for my company , for they be all housel and shrive ere we leave ; and of the give me his word that they be as fit to march to heaven as to . but my mind misdoubt me as to these man who have come with , for they appear to be a very ungodly crew . pass the word that the man kneel , and that the repeat to them the pater , the , and the credo . " with a clank of arm , the rough archer and seaman take to their knee , with bent head and cross hand , listen to the hoarse mutter from the . it be strange to mark the hush ; so that the lap of the water , the straining of the sail , and the creak of the timber grow louder of a sudden upon the ear . many of the bowman have draw amulet and relic from their bosom , while he who possess some more than usually sanctified treasure pass it down the line of his comrade , that all might kiss and reap the virtue . the yellow cog have now shoot out from the narrow water of the , and be plunge and roll on the long heave of the open channel . the wind blow freshly from the east , with a very keen edge to it ; and the great sail belly roundly out , lay the vessel over until the water hiss beneath her lee bulwark . broad and ungainly , she flounder from wave to wave , dip her round bow deeply into the blue roller , and send the white flake of foam in a spatter over her deck . on her larboard quarter lie the two dark galley , which have already hoist sail , and be shoot out from in swift pursuit , their double line of oar give them a vantage which could not fail to bring them up with any vessel which trust to sail alone . high and bluff the english cog ; long , black and swift the pirate galley , like two fierce lean wolf which have see a lordly and unsuspecting stag walk past their forest lair . " shall we turn , my fair lord , or shall we carry on ? " ask the , look behind him with anxious eye . " nay , we must carry on and play the part of the helpless merchant . " " but your pennon ? they will see that we have two knight with us . " " yet it would not be to a knight 's honor or good name to lower his pennon . let them be , and they will think that we be a for , or that we bear the of some mercer of the . , but they be very swift ! they swoop upon us like two goshawk on a heron . be there not some symbol or device upon their sail ? " " that on the right , " say , " appear to have the head of an ethiop upon it . " " ' the badge of , the , " cry a . " i have see it before , when he harry us at . he be a wondrous large and strong man , with no ruth for man , woman , or beast . they say that he have the strength of six ; and , certes , he have the crime of six upon his soul . see , now , to the poor soul who swing at either end of his yard-arm ! " at each end of the yard there do indeed hang the dark figure of a man , jolt and lurch with hideous of its limb at every plunge and swoop of the galley . " by ! " say , " and by the help of and , it will be a very strange thing if our friend do not himself swing thence ere he be many hour old . but what be that upon the other galley ? " " it be the red cross of . this be a very note captain , and it be his boast that there be no seaman and no archer in the world who can compare with those who serve the . " " that we shall prove , " say ; " but it would be well , ere they close with us , to raise up the mantlet and pavis as a screen against their bolt . " he shout a hoarse order , and his seaman work swiftly and silently , heighten the bulwark and strengthen them . the three ship 's anchor be at 's command carry into the waist , and tie to the mast , with twenty foot of cable between , each under the care of four seaman . eight other be station with leather to quench any which might come aboard , while other be send up the mast , to lie along the yard and drop stone or shoot arrow as the occasion serve . " let them be supply with all that be heavy and weighty in the ship , " say . " then we must send them up , " quoth . the knight look at him with a face which strike the smile from his lip . " no squire of mine , " he say , " shall ever make jest of a belt knight . and yet , " he add , his eye softening , " i know that it be but a boy 's mirth , with no sting in it . yet i should ill do my part towards your father if i do not teach you to curb your . " " they will lay us aboard on either quarter , my lord , " cry the master . " see how they stretch out from each other ! the have a mangonel or a upon the forecastle . see , they bend to the lever ! they be about to loose it . " " , " cry the knight , " pick your three trusty archer , and see if you can do something to hinder their aim . methinks they be within long arrow flight . " " seventeen score pace , " say the archer , run his eye backwards and forwards . " by my ten ! it would be a strange thing if we could not notch a mark at that distance . here , of , , , let us show the rogue that they have english bowman to deal with . " the three archer name stand at the further end of the poop , balance themselves with foot widely spread and bow draw , until the head of the arrow be level with the centre of the stave . " you be the sure , , " say , stand by them with shaft upon string . " do you take the rogue with the red coif . you two bring down the man with the , and i will hold myself ready if you miss . ! they be about to loose her . shoot , mes garcon , or you will be too late . " the throng of pirate have clear away from the great wooden catapult , leave two of their number to discharge it . one in a scarlet cap bent over it , steady the jagged rock which be balance on the end of the long wooden lever . the other hold the loop of the rope which would release the catch and send the unwieldy missile hurtle through the air . so for an instant they stand , show hard and clear against the white sail behind them . the next , redcap have fall across the stone with an arrow between his rib ; and the other , strike in the leg and in the throat , be writhe and splutter upon the ground . as he topple backwards he have loose the spring , and the huge beam of wood , swing round with tremendous force , cast the corpse of his comrade so close to the english ship that its mangle and distort limb graze their very stern . as to the stone , it glance off obliquely and fall midway between the vessel . a roar of cheer and of laughter break from the rough archer and seaman at the sight , answer by a yell of rage from their pursuer . " lie low , mes enfants , " cry , motion with his left hand . " they will learn wisdom . they be bring forward shield and mantlet . we shall have some pebble about our ear ere long . " the three vessel have be sweep swiftly westward , the cog still well to the front , although the galley be slowly draw in upon either quarter . to the left be a hard skyline unbroken by a sail . the island already lie like a cloud behind them , while right in front be 's , with loom mistily in the farthest distance . stand by the tiller , look backwards , the fresh wind full in his tooth , the crisp winter air tingle on his face and blow his yellow curl from under his bassinet . his cheek be flush and his eye shine , for the blood of a hundred fight saxon ancestor be begin to stir in his vein . " what be that ? " he ask , as a hiss , voice seem to whisper in his ear . the steersman smile , and point with his foot to where a short heavy quarrel stick quiver in the board . at the same instant the man stumble forward upon his knee , and lie lifeless upon the deck , a blood-stained feather jut out from his back . as stoop to raise him , the air seem to be alive with the sharp of the bolt , and he could hear them patter on the deck like apple at a . " raise two more mantlet by the , " say quietly . " and another man to the tiller , " cry the . " keep them in play , , with ten of your man , " the knight continue . " and let ten of 's bowman do as much for the genoese . i have no mind as yet to show them how much they have to fear from us . " pick shot under stand in line across the broad deck , and it be a lesson to the young squire who have see nothing of war to note how orderly and how cool be these old soldier , how quick the command , and how prompt the carry out , ten moving like one . their comrade crouch beneath the bulwark , with many a rough jest and many a scrap of criticism or advice . " higher , , high ! " " put body into it , ! " " forget not the wind , ! " so run the mutter chorus , while high above it rise the sharp twang of the string , the hiss of the shaft , and the short " your arrow ! nick your arrow ! shoot wholly together ! " from the . and now both mangonel be at work from the galley , but so cover and protect that , save at the moment of discharge , no glimpse could be catch of them . a huge brown rock from the genoese sing over their head , and plunge sullenly into the slope of a wave . another from the whiz into the waist , break the back of a horse , and crash its way through the side of the vessel . two other , fly together , tear a great gap in the upon the sail , and brush three of 's man-at-arms from the forecastle . the look at the knight with a troubled face . " they keep their distance from us , " say he . " our archery be , and they will not close . what defence can we make against the stone ? " " i think i may trick them , " the knight answer cheerfully , and pass his order to the archer . instantly five of them throw up their hand and fall prostrate upon the deck . one have already be slay by a bolt , so that there be but four upon their foot . " that should give them heart , " say , eye the galley , which creep along on either side , with a slow , measured swing of their great oar , the water swirl and foam under their sharp stem . " they still hold aloof , " cry . " then down with two more , " shout their leader . " that will do . ! but they come to our lure like chick to the fowler . to your arm , man ! the pennon behind me , and the squire round the pennon . stand fast with the anchor in the waist , and be ready for a cast . now blow out the trumpet , and may 's benison be with the honest man ! " as he speak a roar of voice and a roll of drum come from either galley , and the water be lash into spray by the hurried beat of a hundred oar . down they swoop , one on the right , one on the left , the side and shroud black with man and bristle with weapon . in heavy cluster they hang upon the forecastle all ready for a white , face brown , face yellow , and face black , fair , swarthy italian , fierce rover from the , and fiery moor from the , of all hue and country , and mark solely by the common stamp of a ferocity . rasp up on either side , with oar trail to save them from snap , they pour in a live torrent with horrid yell and shrill whoop upon the defenceless merchantman . but wilder yet be the cry , and shrill still the scream , when there rise up from the shadow of those silent bulwark the long line of the english bowman , and the arrow whizz in a deadly sleet among the unprepared mass upon the pirate deck . from the high side of the cog the bowman could shoot straight down , at a range which be so short as to enable a shaft to pierce through or to transfix a shield , though it be an inch thick of toughen wood . one moment see the galley 's poop crowd with rush figure , wave arm , exultant face ; the next it be a shambles , with body pile three deep upon each other , the living cower behind the dead to shelter themselves from that sudden of death . on either side the seaman whom have choose for the purpose have cast their anchor over the side of the galley , so that the three vessel , lock in an iron grip , lurch heavily forward upon the swell . and now set in a fell and fierce fight , one of a thousand of which no chronicler have speak and no poet sing . through all the century and over all those southern water nameless man have fight in nameless place , their sole monument a protect coast and an . fore and aft the archer have clear the galley ' deck , but from either side the rover have pour down into the waist , where the seaman and bowman be push back and so mingle with their foe that it be impossible for their comrade above to draw string to help them . it be a wild chaos where axe and sword rise and fall , while englishman , , and italian staggered and reel on a deck which be cumber with body and slippery with blood . the clang of blow , the cry of the stricken , the short , deep shout of the islander , and the fierce whoop of the rover , rise together in a deafen tumult , while the breath of the pant man go up in the wintry air like the smoke from a furnace . the giant , towering above his fellow and clad from head to foot in plate of proof , lead on his boarder , wave a huge mace in the air , with which he strike to the deck every man who approach him . on the other side , , a dwarf in height , but of great breadth of shoulder and length of arm , have cut a road almost to the mast , with three-score genoese man-at-arms close at his heel . between these two formidable assailant the seaman be be slowly wedge more closely together , until they stand back to back under the mast with the rover rage upon every side of them . but help be close at hand . with his man-at-arms have swarm down from the forecastle , while , with his three squire , , , , and a score more , throw themselves from the poop and hurl themselves into the thick of the fight . , as in duty bound , keep his eye fix ever on his lord and press forward close at his heel . often have he hear of 's prowess and skill with all knightly weapon , but all the tale that have reach his ear fall far short of the real quickness and coolness of the man . it be as if the devil be in him , for he spring here and spring there , now thrust and now cut , catch blow on his shield , turn them with his blade , stoop under the swing of an axe , spring over the sweep of a sword , so swift and so erratic that the man who brace himself for a blow at him might find him six pace off ere he could bring it down . three pirate have fall before him , and he have wound in the neck , when the giant spring at him from the side with a slash blow from his deadly mace . stoop to avoid it , and at the same instant turn a thrust from the genoese swordsman , but , his foot slip in a pool of blood , he fall heavily to the ground . spring in front of the , but his sword be shatter and he himself beat to the ground by a second blow from the ponderous weapon . ere the pirate chief could repeat it , however , 's iron grip fall upon his wrist , and he find that for once he be in the hand of a strong man than himself . fiercely he strive to disengage his weapon , but bend his arm slowly back until , with a sharp crack , like a breaking stave , it turn limp in his grasp , and the mace drop from the nerveless finger . in vain he try to pluck it up with the other hand . back and back still his foeman bend him , until , with a roar of pain and of fury , the giant clang his full length upon the board , while the glimmer of a knife before the bar of his helmet warn him that short would be his shrift if he move . cow and dishearten by the loss of their leader , the have give back and be now stream over the bulwark on to their own galley , drop a dozen at a time on to her deck . but the anchor still hold them in its crooked claw , and with fifty man be hard upon their heel . now , too , the archer have room to draw their bow once more , and great stone from the yard of the cog come thunder and crash among the fly rover . here and there they rush with wild scream and curse , dive under the sail , crouch behind boom , huddle into corner like rabbit when the ferret be upon them , as helpless and as hopeless . they be stern day , and if the honest soldier , too poor for a ransom , have no prospect of mercy upon the , what ruth be there for sea robber , the enemy of humankind , take in the very deed , with proof of their crime still swing upon their yard-arm . but the fight have take a new and a strange turn upon the other side . and his man have give slowly back , hard press by , , , and the . foot by foot the have retreat , his armor run blood at every joint , his shield split , his crest shear , his voice fall away to a mere gasp and croak . yet he face his foeman with dauntless courage , dash in , spring back , sure-footed , , with a point which seem to menace three at once . beat back on to the deck of his own vessel , and closely follow by a dozen englishman , he disengage himself from them , run swiftly down the deck , spring back into the cog once more , cut the rope which hold the anchor , and be back in an instant among his . at the same time the genoese sailor thrust with their oar against the side of the cog , and a rapidly widen rift appear between the two vessel . " by ! " cry , " we be cut off from . " " he be lose , " gasp . " come , let us spring for it . " the two youth jump with all their strength to reach the depart galley . 's foot reach the edge of the bulwark , and his hand clutch a rope he swing himself on board . fall short , crash in among the oar , and bound off into the sea . , stagger to the side , be about to hurl himself after him , but drag him back by the girdle . " you can scarce stand , lad , far less jump , " say he . " see how the blood rip from your bassinet . " " my place be by the flag , " cry , vainly struggle to break from the other 's hold . " bide here , man . you would need wing ere you could reach 's side . " the vessel be indeed so far apart now that the genoese could use the full sweep of their oar , and draw away rapidly from the cog . " my , but it be a noble fight ! " shout big , clap his hand . " they have clear the poop , and they spring into the waist . well strike , my lord ! well strike , ! see to , how he storm among the ! but this be a gallant warrior . he rally his man upon the forecastle . he have slay an archer . ! my lord be upon him . look to it , ! see to the whirl and glitter of it ! " " by heaven , be down ! " cry the squire . " up ! " roar . " it be but a feint . he bear him back . he drive him to the side . ah , by our , his sword be through him ! they cry for mercy . down go the red cross , and up spring with the scarlet rose ! " the death of the genoese leader do indeed bring the resistance to an end . amid a thunder of cheer from cog and from galley the forked pennon flutter upon the forecastle , and the galley , sweeping round , come slowly back , as the slave who row it learn the wish of their new master . the two knight have come aboard the cog , and the have be throw off , the three vessel now move abreast . through all the storm and rush of the fight have be aware of the voice of , the , with his constant " the bowline ! veer the sheet ! " and strange it be to him to see how swiftly the blood-stained sailor turn from the strife to the rope and back . now the cog 's head be turn , and the shipman walk the deck , a peaceful once more . " there be sad do to the cog , , " say he . " here be a hole in the side two ell across , the sail split through the centre , and the wood as bare as a friar 's poll . in good sooth , i know not what i shall say to when i see the once more . " " by ! it would be a very sorry thing if we suffer you to be the bad of this day 's work , " say . " you shall take these galley back with you , and may sell them . then from the money he shall take as much as may make good the damage , and the rest he shall keep until our , when every man shall have his share . an image of silver fifteen inch high i have vow to the , to be place in her chapel within the priory , for that she be please to allow me to come upon this , who seem to me from what i have see of him to be a very sprightly and valiant gentleman . but how fare it with you , ? " " it be nothing , my fair lord , " say , who have now loosen his bassinet , which be crack across by the 's blow . even as he speak , however , his head swirl round , and he fall to the deck with the blood gush from his nose and mouth . " he will come to anon , " say the knight , stoop over him and pass his finger through his hair . " i have lose one very valiant and gentle squire this day . i can ill afford to lose another . how many man have fall ? " " i have prick off the tally , " say , who have come aboard with his lord . " there be seven of the man , eleven seaman , your squire , young , and nine archer . " " and of the other ? " " they be all only the knight who stand behind you . what would you that we should do with him ? " " he must hang on his own yard , " say . " it be my vow and must be do . " the pirate leader have stand by the bulwark , a cord round his arm , and two stout archer on either side . at 's word he start violently , and his swarthy feature blanch to a livid gray . " how , ? " he cry in break english . " ? to hang , le mort ! to hang ! " " it be my vow , " say shortly . " from what i hear , you think little enough of hang other . " " , base , " cry the other . " it be their fitting death . , le sing des dan sis vein ! ! " turn upon his heel , while two seaman cast a noose over the pirate 's neck . at the touch of the cord he snap the bond which bind him , dash one of the archer to the deck , and seize the other round the waist spring with him into the sea . " by my hilt , he be go ! " cry , rush to the side . " they have sink together like a stone . " " i be right glad of it , " answer ; " for though it be against my vow to loose him , i deem that he have carry himself like a very gentle and debonnaire cavalier . " for two day the yellow cog run swiftly before a northeasterly wind , and on the dawn of the third the high land of lie like a mist upon the shimmer . there come a plump of rain towards and the breeze die down , but it freshen again before nightfall , and veer his sheet and held head for the south . next morning they have pass , and run through the midst of a fleet of transport return from . and at once hang their shield over the side , and display their pennon as be the custom , note with the keen interest the answer symbol which tell the name of the cavalier who have be constrain by ill health or wound to leave the prince at so critical a time . that evening a great cloud bank up in the west , and an anxious man be , for a third part of his crew have be slay , and half the remainder be aboard the galley , so that , with an injured ship , he be little fit to meet such a storm as sweep over those water . all night it blow in short fitful puff , heel the great cog over until the water curl over her lee bulwark . as the wind still freshen the yard be lower half way down the mast in the morning . , wretchedly ill and weak , with his head still ring from the blow which he have receive , crawl up upon deck . and aslant , it be preferable to the noisome , dungeon which serve as cabin . there , cling to the stout halliard of the sheet , he gaze with amazement at the long line of black wave , each with its curling ridge of foam , race in endless succession from out the inexhaustible west . a huge sombre cloud , fleck with livid blotch , stretch over the whole seaward , with long ragged streamer whirl out in front of it . far behind them the two galley labor heavily , now sink between the roller until their yard be level with the wave , and again shoot up with a reel , scoop motion until every spar and rope stand out hard against the sky . on the leave the low-lying land stretch in a dim haze , rise here and there into a dark blur which mark the high cape and headland . the land of ! 's eye shine as he gaze upon it . the land of ! -- very word sound as the call of a bugle in the ear of the youth of . the land where their father have bleed , the home of chivalry and of knightly deed , the country of gallant man , of courtly woman , of princely building , of the wise , the polished and the sainted . there it lie , so still and gray beneath the drift home of thing noble and of thing theatre where a new name might be make or an old one mar . from his bosom to his lip come the crumpled veil , and he breathe a vow that if valor and goodwill could raise him to his lady 's side , then death alone should hold him back from her . his thought be still in the wood of and the old armory of , when the hoarse voice of the bring them back once more to the of . " by my troth , young sir , " he say , " you be as long in the face as the devil at a christening , and i can marvel at it , for i have sail these water since i be as high as this , and yet i never see more sure promise of an evil night . " " nay , i have other thing upon my mind , " the squire answer . " and so have every man , " cry in an injured voice . " let the shipman see to it . it be the 's affair . put it all upon good ! have i so much care since first i blow trumpet and show cartel at the west gate of . " " what be amiss then ? " ask , for the man 's word be as gusty as the weather . " amiss , ? here be i with but half my mariner , and a hole in the ship where that stone strike us big enough to fit the fat widow of through . it be well enough on this tack , but i would have you tell me what i be to do on the other . we be like to have salt water upon us until we be find pickle like the herrings in an 's barrel . " " what say to it ? " " he be below prick out the of his mother 's uncle . ' me not with such small matter ! ' be all that i could get from him . then there be . ' them in oil with a dressing of , ' quoth he , and then swear at me because i have not be the cook . ' , ' think i , ' mad master , sober away forward to the archer . and alas ! but they be worse than the other . " " would they not help you then ? " " nay , they sit and at a board , him that they call and the great red-headed man who snap the 's , and the black man from , and a score of other , rattle their dice in an archer 's gauntlet for want of a box . ' the ship can scarce last much longer , my master , ' quoth ' that be your business , old , ' cry the black galliard . ' , ' say . ' a five , a four and the main , ' shout the big man , with a voice like the flap of a sail . hark to them now , young sir , and say if i speak not sooth . " as he speak , there sound high above the shriek of the gale and the straining of the timber a gust of oath with a roar of mirth from the gambler in the forecastle . " can i be of avail ? " ask . " say the word and the thing be do , if two hand may do it . " " , nay , your head i can see be still , and ' faith little head would you have , have your bassinet not stand your friend . all that may be do be already carry out , for we have stuff the gape with sail and cord it without and within . yet when we bale our bowline and veer the sheet our life will hang upon the breach remain block . see how yonder headland loom upon us through the mist ! we must tack within three arrow flight , or we may find a rock through our timber . now , be praise ! here be , with whom i may confer . " " i that you will pardon me , " say the knight , clutch his way along the bulwark . " i would not show lack of courtesy toward a worthy man , but i be deep in a matter of some weight , concerning which , , i should be glad of your rede . it touch the question of dimidiation or impalement in the coat of mine uncle , of , who take unto wife the widow of of . the case have be much debate by pursuivant and king-of-arms . but how be it with you , master shipman ? " " ill enough , my fair lord . the cog must go about anon , and i know not how we may keep the water out of her . " " go call ! " say , and presently the portly knight make his way all astraddle down the slippery deck . " by my soul , , this pass all patience ! " he cry wrathfully . " if this ship of yours must needs dance and skip like a clown at a , then i pray you that you will put me into one of these . i have but sit down to a flask of malvoisie and a of brawn , as be my use about this hour , when there come a , and i find my wine over my leg and the flask in my lap , and then as i stoop to clip it there come another cursed , and there be a of brawn stick fast to the nape of my neck . at this moment i have two page course after it from side to side , like hound behind a leveret . never do live pig gambol more lightly . but you have send for me , ? " " i would fain have your rede , , for have fear that when we veer there may come danger from the hole in our side . " " then do not veer , " quoth hastily . " and now , fair sir , i must hasten back to see how my rogue have fare with the brawn . " " , but this will scarce suffice , " cry the shipman . " if we do not veer we will be upon the rock within the hour . " " then veer , " say . " there be my rede ; and now , , i must crave -- -- -- " at this instant , however , a startle shout ring out from two seaman upon the forecastle . " rock ! " they yell , stab into the air with their forefinger . " rock beneath our very bow ! " through the belly of a great black wave , not one hundred pace to the front of them , there thrust forth a huge jagged mass of brown stone , which spout spray as though it be some crouch monster , while a dull menace boom and roar fill the air . " yare ! yare ! " scream , fling himself upon the long pole which serve as a tiller . " cut the halliard ! haul her over ! lay her two course to the wind ! " over swing the great boom , and the cog tremble and quiver within five of the breaker . " she can scarce draw clear , " cry , with his eye from the sail to the seething line of foam . " the holy julian stand by us and the ! " " if there be such peril , , " quoth , " it would be very knightly and fitting that we should show our pennon . i pray you , , that you will command my to put forward my banner . " " and sound the trumpet ! " cry . " in manus , ! i be in the keep of of , to whose shrine i shall make pilgrimage , and in whose honor i vow that i will eat a carp each year upon his feast-day . , but the wave roar ! how be it with us now , ? " " we draw ! we draw ! " cry , with his eye still fix upon the foam which hiss under the very bulge of the side . " ah , , be with us now ! " as he speak the cog rasp along the edge of the reef , and a long white curling sheet of wood be plane off from her side from waist to poop by a jut horn of the rock . at the same instant she lie suddenly over , the sail draw full , and she plunge seawards amid the of the seaman and the archer . " the be praise ! " cry the shipman , wipe his brow . " for this shall bell swing and candle burn when i see once more . cheerily , my heart ! pull on the bowline ! " " by my soul ! i would rather have a dry death , " quoth . " though , ! i have eat so many fish that it be but justice that the fish should eat me . now i must back to the cabin , for i have matter there which crave my attention . " " , , you have well bide with us , and still show your ensign , " answer ; " for , if i understand the matter aright , we have but turn from one danger to the other . " " good , " cry the boatswain , rush aft , " the water come in upon us apace . the wave have drive in the sail wherewith we strive to stop the hole . " as he speak the seaman come swarm on to the poop and the forecastle to avoid the torrent which pour through the huge leak into the waist . high above the roar of the wind and the clash of the sea rise the shrill cry of the horse , as they find the water rise rapidly around them . " stop it from without ! " cry , seize the end of the wet sail with which the gap have be plug . " speedily , my heart , or we be go ! " swiftly they reeve rope to the corner , and then , rush forward to the bow , they lower them under the keel , and draw them tight in such a way that the sail should cover the outer face of the gap . the force of the rush of water be check by this obstacle , but it still squirt plentifully from every side of it . at the side the horse be above the belly , and in the centre a man from the poop could scarce touch the deck with a seven-foot spear . the cog lie low in the water and the wave splash freely over the weather bulwark . " i fear that we can scarce bide upon this tack , " cry ; " and yet the other will drive us on the rock . " " might we not haul down sail and wait for good time ? " suggest . " nay , we should drift upon the rock . thirty year have i be on the sea , and never yet in great strait . yet we be in the hand of the . " " of whom , " cry , " i look more particularly to of , who have already befriend us this day , and on whose feast i hereby vow that i shall eat a second carp , if he will but interpose a second time . " the wrack have thicken to seaward , and the coast be but a blur line . two vague shadow in the offing show where the roll and toss upon the great roller . look wistfully in their direction . " if they would but lie closer we might find safety , even should the cog founder . you will bear me out with good of that i have do all that a shipman might . it would be well that you should doff camail and greaves , , for , by the black rood ! it be like enough that we shall have to swim for it . " " , " say the little knight , " it would be scarce fitting that a cavalier should throw off his harness for the fear of every puff of wind and puddle of water . i would rather that my company should gather round me here on the poop , where we might abide together whatever may be please to send . but , certes , , for all that my sight be none of the good , it be not the first time that i have see that headland upon the left . " the seaman shade his eye with his hand , and gaze earnestly through the haze and spray . suddenly he throw up his arm and shout aloud in his joy . " ' the point of ! " he cry . " i have not think that we be as far as . the lie before us , and once over the bar , and under shelter of the , all will be well with us . veer again , my heart , and bring her to try with the main course ! " the sail swing round once more , and the cog , batter and tear and well-nigh water-logged , staggered in for this haven of refuge . a bluff cape to the north and a long spit to the south mark the mouth of the noble river , with a low-lying island of silt sand in the centre , all shroud and curtain by the spume of the breaker . a line of break water trace the dangerous bar , which in clear day and balmy weather have crack the back of many a tall ship . " there be a channel , " say , " which be show to me by the 's own pilot . yonder tree upon the bank , and see the tower which rise behind it . if these two be hold in a line , even as we hold them now , it may be do , though our ship draw two good ell more than when she put forth . " " speed you , ! " cry . " twice have we come out of peril , and now for the third time i commend me to the bless of , to whom i vow -- -- -- " " , nay , old friend , " whisper . " you be like to bring a judgment upon us with these vow , which no live man could accomplish . have i not already hear you vow to eat two carp in one day , and now you would venture upon a third ? " " i pray you that you will order the company to lie down , " cry , who have take the tiller and be gaze ahead with a fix eye . " in three minute we shall either be lose or in safety . " archer and seaman lie flat upon the deck , wait in stolid silence for whatever fate might come . bend his weight upon the tiller , and crouch to see under the belly sail . and stand erect with hand cross in front of the poop . down swoop the great cog into the narrow channel which be the portal to safety . on either bow roar the shallow bar . right ahead one small lane of black swirling water mark the pilot 's course . but true be the eye and firm the hand which guide . a dull scrape come from beneath , the vessel quiver and shake , at the waist , at the quarter , and behind sound that grim roaring of the water , and with a plunge the yellow cog be over the bar and speed swiftly up the broad and tranquil estuary of the . it be on the morning of , the day of , two day before the feast of , that the cog and her two prisoner , after a weary tack up the and the , drop anchor at last in front of the noble city of . with wonder and admiration , , lean over the bulwark , gaze at the forest of mast , the swarm of boat dart hither and thither on the bosom of the broad curve stream , and the gray crescent-shaped city which stretch with many a tower and minaret along the western shore . have he in his quiet life see so great a town , nor be there in the whole of , save alone , one which might match it in size or in wealth . here come the merchandise of all the fair country which be water by the and the cloth of the south , the skin of , the wine of the be bear away to , , , or , in exchange for the wool and of . here too dwell those famous smelter and welder who have make the steel the most trusty upon earth , and could give a temper to lance or to sword which might mean dear life to its owner . could see the smoke of their forge reek up in the clear morning air . the storm have die down now to a gentle breeze , which waft to his ear the stir which sound from the ancient rampart . " , petit ! " say , come up to where he stand . " thou art a squire now , and like enough to win the golden spur , while i be still the , and i shall bide . i dare scarce wag my tongue so freely with you as when we tramp together past , else i might be your guide now , for indeed i know every house in as a friar know the bead on his rosary . " " , , " say , lay his hand upon the sleeve of his companion 's fray jerkin , " you can think me so thrall as to throw aside an old friend because i have have some small share of good fortune . i take it unkind that you should have think such evil of me . " " , gar . ' but a flight shoot to see if the wind blow steady , though i be a rogue to doubt it . " " why , have i not meet you , , at the inn , who can say where i have now be ! certes , i have not go to , nor become squire to , nor meet -- -- -- " he pause abruptly and flush to his hair , but the bowman be too busy with his own thought to notice his young companion 's embarrassment . " it be a good hostel , that of the ' , ' " he remark . " by my ten finger bone ! when i hang bow on nail and change my brigandine for a tunic , i might do worse than take over the dame and her business . " " i think , " say , " that you be betroth to some one at . " " to three , " answer moodily , " to three . i fear i may not go back to . i might chance to see hot service in than i have ever do in . but mark you now yonder lofty turret in the centre , which stand back from the river and have a broad banner upon the summit . see the rise sun flash full upon it and sparkle on the golden lion . ' the royal banner of , cross by the prince 's label . there he dwell in the of , where he have keep his court these year back . beside it be the minster of the same saint , who have the town under his very special care . " " and how of yon gray turret on the left ? " " ' the fane of , as that upon the right be of . there , too , above the poop of yonder , you see the tower of and of . also the mighty rampart which be pierce by the three , and sixteen other to the landward side . " " and how be it , good , that there come so much music from the town ? i seem to hear a hundred trumpet , all calling in chorus . " " it would be strange else , see that all the great lord of and of be within the wall , and each would have his trumpeter blow as loud as his neighbor , lest it might be think that his dignity have be abate . ! they make as much as a scotch army , where every man fill himself with , and sit up all night to blow upon the . see all along the bank how the page water the horse , and there beyond the town how they gallop them over the plain ! for every horse you see a belt knight have in the town , for , as i learn , the man-at-arms and archer have already go forward to . " " i trust , , " say , come upon deck , " that the man be ready for the land . go tell them that the boat will be for them within the hour . " the archer raise his hand in salute , and hasten forward . in the meantime have follow his brother knight , and the two pace the poop together , in his velvet suit with flat cap of the same , adorn in front with the 's glove and girt round with a curl ostrich feather . the lusty knight , on the other hand , be clad in the very late mode , with , doublet , pourpoint , , and of olive-green , pick out with pink and jag at the edge . a red chaperon or cap , with long hang , sit daintily on the back of his head , while his shoe be twist up a , as though the toe be shoot forth a tendril which might hope in time to entwine itself around his massive leg . " once more , , " say , look with sparkling eye , " do we find ourselves at the gate of honor , the door which have so often lead us to all that be knightly and worthy . there fly the prince 's banner , and it would be well that we haste ashore and pay our obeisance to him . the boat already swarm from the bank . " " there be a goodly hostel near the west gate , which be fame for the stew of spice pullet , " remark . " we might take the edge of our hunger off ere we seek the prince , for though his table be gay with damask and silver he be no trencherman himself , and have no sympathy for those who be his better . " " his better ! " " his better before the , lad . sniff not treason where none be mean . i have see him smile in his quiet way because i have look for the fourth time towards the carve squire . and indeed to watch him dally with a little gobbet of bread , or sip his cup of wine , be enough to make a man feel shame at his own hunger . yet war and glory , my good friend , though well enough in their way , will not serve to tighten such a belt as clasp my waist . " " how read you that coat which hang over yonder galley , ? " ask . " argent , a bend vert between dancette gules . " " it be a northern coat . i have see it in the train of the . from the shield , there be not one of these vessel which have not knight or baron aboard . i would mine eye be good . how read you this upon the left ? " " argent and azure , a wavy of six . " " , it be the sign of the ! and there beyond i see the red and silver of the of , who like myself be of lineage . close behind us be the moline cross of the gallant , and beside it the bloody chevron of the , with the amulet of the of . by ! it would be a very strange thing if so noble a company be to gather without some notable deed of arm arise from it . and here be our boat , , so it seem good to me that we should go to the abbey with our squire , leave to have his own way in the unload . " the horse both of knight and squire be speedily lower into a broad lighter , and reach the shore almost as soon as their master . bend his knee devoutly as he put foot on land , and take a small black patch from his bosom he bind it tightly over his left eye . " the blessed and the memory of my sweet raise high my heart ! " quoth he . " and as a token i vow that i will not take this patch from my eye until i have see something of this country of , and do such a small deed as it lie in me to do . and this i swear upon the cross of my sword and upon the glove of my lady . " " in truth , you take me back twenty year , , " quoth , as they mount and ride slowly through the . " after , i deem that the french thought that we be an army of the blind , for there be scarce a man who have not close an eye for the great love and honor of his lady . yet it go hard with you that you should darken one side , when with both open you can scarce tell a horse from a mule . in truth , friend , i think that you step over the line of reason in this matter . " " , " say the little knight shortly , " i would have you to understand that , blind as i be , i can yet see the path of honor very clearly , and that that be the road upon which i do not crave another man 's guidance . " " by my soul , " say , " you be as tart as verjuice this morning ! if you be bend upon a quarrel with me i must leave you to your humor and drop into ' ' here , for i mark a varlet pass the door who bare a smoking dish , which have , methought , a most excellent smell . " " , , " cry his comrade , lay his hand upon his knee ; " we have know each other over long to fall out , , like two raw page at their first . you must come with me first to the prince , and then back to the hostel ; though sure i be that it would grieve his heart that any gentle cavalier should turn from his board to a common tavern . but be not that my who wave to us ? ! my fair lord , and be with you ! and there be . , ! i be right glad to see you . " the two knight walk their horse abreast , while and , with , who be squire to , keep some pace behind them , a in front of and of the . , a lean , silent man , have be to those part before , and sit his horse with a rigid neck ; but the two young squire gaze eagerly to right or leave , and pluck each other 's sleeve to call attention to the many strange thing on every side of them . " see to the brave stall ! " cry . " see to the noble armor set forth , and the costly oh , , see to where the scrivener sit with the pigment and the , and the roll of sheepskin as white as the napery ! saw man ever the like before ? " " , man , there be fine stall in , " answer , whose father have take him to on occasion of one of the . " i have see a silversmith 's booth here which would serve to buy either side of this street . but mark these house , , how they thrust forth upon the top . and see to the at every window , and banner or pensil on the roof . " " and the church ! " cry . " the priory at be a noble pile , but it be cold and bare , methinks , by one of these , with their , and their carving , and their tracery , as though some great of stone have curl and wanton over the wall . " " and hark to the speech of the folk ! " say . " be ever such a hiss and clack ? i wonder that they have not wit to learn english now that they have come under the english crown . by of ! there be fair face amongst them . see the wench with the brown ! out on you , , that you would rather gaze upon dead stone than on live flesh ! " it be little wonder that the richness and ornament , not only of church and of stall , but of every private house as well , should have impress itself upon the young squire . the town be now at the height of its fortune . besides its trade and its armorer , other cause have combine to pour wealth into it . , which have wrought evil upon so many fair city around , have bring nought but good to this one . as her french sister decay she increase , for here , from north , and from east , and from south , come the plunder to be sell and the ransom money to be spend . through all her sixteen landward gate there have set for many year a double tide of empty-handed soldier hurry , and of enrich and lade band who bring their spoil home . the prince 's court , too , with its swarm of noble baron and wealthy knight , many of whom , in imitation of their master , have bring their lady and their child from , all help to swell the coffer of the burgher . now , with this fresh influx of nobleman and cavalier , food and lodging be scarce to be have , and the prince be hurry forward his force to in to relieve the overcrowding of his capital . in front of the minster and abbey of 's be a large square crowd with priest , soldier , woman , friar , and burgher , who make it their common centre for sight-seeing and gossip . amid the knot of noisy and gesticulate townsfolk , many small party of mounted knight and squire thread their way towards the prince 's quarter , where the huge door be throw back to show that he hold audience within . archer stand about the gateway , and beat back from time to time with their the inquisitive and chatter crowd who swarm round the portal . two knight in full armor , with lance raise and close visor , sit their horse on either side , while in the centre , with two page to tend upon him , there stand a man in flow purple gown , who prick off upon a sheet of parchment the style and title of each applicant , marshal them in their due order , and give to each the place and facility which his rank demand . his long white beard and search eye impart to him an air of masterful dignity , which be increase by his vesture and the heraldic barret cap with triple plume which bespeak his office . " it be , the prince 's own herald and scrivener , " whisper , as they pull up amid the line of knight who wait admission . " fare it with the man who would venture to deceive him . he have by rote the name of every knight of or of ; and all the tree of his family , with his kinship , , marriage , augmentation , abatement , and i know not what beside . we may leave our horse here with the varlet , and push forward with our squire . " follow 's counsel , they press on upon foot until they be close to the prince 's secretary , who be in high debate with a young and foppish knight , who be bend upon make his way past him . " ! " say the . " it be in my mind , young sir , that you have not be present before . " " nay , it be but a day since i set foot in , but i fear lest the prince should think it strange that i have not wait upon him . " " the prince have other thing to think upon , " quoth ; " but if you be a you must be a of , and indeed i see now that your coat be sable and ermine . " " i be a of , " the other answer , with some uneasiness of manner . " then you must be , for i learn that when old die he come in for the arm and the name , the war-cry and the profit . " " be my elder brother , and i be , the second son , " say the youth . " in sooth and in sooth ! " cry the with scornful eye . " and pray , sir second son , where be the cadency mark which should mark your rank . dare you to wear your brother 's coat without the crescent which should stamp you as his cadet . away to your lodging , and come not nigh the prince until the armorer have place the true charge upon your shield . " as the youth withdraw in confusion , 's keen eye single out the five red rose from amid the overlapping shield and cloud of pennon which face him . " ! " he cry , " there be charge here which be above counterfeit . the rose of and the boar 's head of may stand back in peace , but by my faith ! they be not to be hold back in war . welcome , , ! will be glad to his very when he see you . this way , my fair sir . your squire be doubtless worthy the fame of their master . down this passage , ! ! ! one of the old strain of , i doubt not . and , they be of a south saxon stock , and of good repute . there be in and in , and also , as i have hear , upon the border . so , my fair sir , and i shall see that you be shortly admit . " he have finish his professional commentary by fling open a folding door , and usher the party into a broad hall , which be fill with a great number of people who be wait , like themselves , for an audience . the room be very spacious , light on one side by three arched and mullioned window , while opposite be a huge fireplace in which a pile of faggot be blaze merrily . many of the company have crowd round the flame , for the weather be bitterly cold ; but the two knight seat themselves upon a , with their squire stand behind them . look down the room , mark that both floor and ceiling be of the rich oak , the latter span by twelve arch beam , which be adorn at either end by the lily and the lion of the royal arm . on the further side be a small door , on each side of which stand man-at-arms . from time to time an elderly man in black with rounded shoulder and a long white wand in his hand come softly forth from this inner room , and beckon to one or other of the company , who doff cap and follow him . the two knight be deep in talk , when become aware of a remarkable individual who be walk round the room in their direction . as he pass each knot of cavalier every head turn to look after him , and it be evident , from the bow and respectful salutation on all side , that the interest which he excite be not due merely to his strange personal appearance . he be tall and straight as a lance , though of a great age , for his hair , which curl from under his velvet cap of maintenance , be as white as the snow . yet , from the swing of his stride and the spring of his step , it be clear that he have not yet lose the fire and activity of his youth . his fierce face be clean shaven like that of a priest , save for a long thin wisp of white moustache which droop down half way to his shoulder . that he have be handsome might be easily judge from his high aquiline nose and clear-cut chin ; but his feature have be so distort by the seam and scar of old wound , and by the loss of one eye which have be tear from the socket , that there be little leave to remind one of the dashing young knight who have be fifty year ago the fair as well as the bold of the english chivalry . yet what knight be there in that hall of 's who would not have gladly lay down youth , beauty , and all that he possess to win the fame of this man ? for who could be name with , the stainless knight , the wise councillor , the valiant warrior , the hero of , of , of , of , and of as many other battle as there be year to his life ? " , my little heart of gold ! " he cry , dart forward suddenly and throw his arm round . " i hear that you be here and have be seek you . " " my fair and dear lord , " say the knight , return the warrior be embrace , " i have indeed come back to you , for where else shall i go that i may learn to be a gentle and a hardy knight ? " " by my troth ! " say with a smile , " it be very fitting that we should be companion , , for since you have tie up one of your eye , and i have have the mischance to lose one of mine , we have but a pair between us . ah , ! you be on the blind side of me and i see you not . a wise woman have make prophecy that this blind side will one day be the death of me . we shall go in to the prince anon ; but in truth he have much upon his hand , for what with , and the of , and the of , who be no two day of the same mind , and the gascon baron who be all chaffer for term like so many huckster , he have an uneasy part to play . but how left you the ? " " she be well , my fair lord , and send her service and greeting to you . " " i be ever her knight and slave . and your journey , i trust that it be pleasant ? " " as heart could wish . we have sight of two rover galley , and even come to have some slight bickering with them . " " ever in luck 's way , ! " quoth . " we must hear the tale anon . but i deem it best that should leave your squire and come with me , for , press the prince may be , i be very sure that he would be loth to keep two old upon the further side of the door . follow close behind me , and i will forestall old , though i can scarce promise to roll forth your style and rank as be his wont . " so say , he lead the way to the inner chamber , the two companion tread close at his heel , and nod to right and leave as they catch sight of familiar face among the crowd . the prince 's , although of no great size , be fit up with all the state and luxury which the fame and power of its owner demand . a high dais at the further end be roof in by a broad canopy of scarlet velvet spangle with silver fleur-de-lis , and support at either corner by silver rod . this be approach by four step carpet with the same material , while all round be scatter rich cushion , oriental mat and costly rug of fur . the choicest tapestry which the loom of could furnish drape the wall , whereon the battle of be set forth , with the jewish warrior in plate of proof , with crest and lance and banderole , as the naive artist of the day be wont to depict them . a few rich settle and , choicely carve and decorate with glaze leather hanging of the sort term or , complete the furniture of the apartment , save that at one side of the dais there stand a lofty perch , upon which a cast of three solemn prussian gerfalcon sit , hooded and , as silent and motionless as the royal fowler who stand beside them . in the centre of the dais be two very high chair with , which arch forwards over the head of the occupant , the whole cover with light-blue silk thickly powdered with golden star . on that to the right sit a very tall and well form man with red hair , a livid face , and a cold blue eye , which have in it something peculiarly sinister and menace . he lounge back in a careless position , and yawn repeatedly as though heartily weary of the proceeding , stoop from time to time to fondle a shaggy spanish greyhound which lie stretch at his foot . on the other throne there be perch bolt upright , with prim demeanor , as though he feel himself to be upon his good behavior , a little , round , pippin face person , who smile and bob to every one whose eye he chance to meet . between and a little in front of them on a humble or stool , sit a slim , dark young man , whose quiet attire and modest manner would scarce proclaim him to be the most noted prince in . a jupon of dark blue cloth , tag with buckle and pendant of gold , seem but a sombre and plain attire amidst the wealth of silk and ermine and gilt tissue of fustian with which he be surround . he sit with his two hand clasp round his knee , his head slightly bend , and an expression of impatience and of trouble upon his clear , feature . behind the throne there stand two man in purple gown , with ascetic , clean-shaven face , and half a dozen other high dignitary and office-holder of . below on either side of the step be forty or fifty baron , knight , and courtier , range in a triple row to the right and the left , with a clear passage in the centre . " there sit the prince , " whisper , as they enter . " he on the right be , whom we be about to put upon the spanish throne . the other be , whom we purpose with the aid of to help to his throne in . now follow me , and take it not to heart if he be a little short in his speech , for indeed his mind be full of many very weighty concern . " the prince , however , have already observe their entrance , and , spring to his foot , he have advance with a winning smile and the light of welcome in his eye . " we do not need your good office as herald here , , " say he in a low but clear voice ; " these valiant knight be very well know to me . welcome to , and . nay , keep your knee for my sweet father at . i would have your hand , my friend . we be like to give you some work to do ere you see the down of once more . know you aught of , ? " " nought , my sire , save that i have hear man say that there be a dish name an olla which be prepare there , though i have never be clear in my mind as to whether it be but a ragout such as be to be find in the south , or whether there be some season such as fennel or garlic which be peculiar to . " " your doubt , , shall soon be resolve , " answer the prince , laugh heartily , as do many of the baron who surround them . " his majesty here will doubtless order that you have this dish hotly seasoned when we be all safely in . " " i will have a hotly seasoned dish for some folk i know of , " answer with a cold smile . " but my friend can fight right hardily without either bite or sup , " remark the prince . " do i not see him at , when for two day we have not more than a crust of bread and a cup of foul water , yet carry himself most valiantly . with my own eye i see him in the rout sweep the head from a knight of with one blow of his sword . " " the rogue get between me and the near french victual wain , " mutter , amid a fresh titter from those who be near enough to catch his word . " how many have you in your train ? " ask the prince , assume a graver mien . " i have forty man-at-arms , sire , " say . " and i have one hundred archer and a score of lancer , but there be two hundred man who wait for me on this side of the water upon the border of . " " and who be they , ? " " they be a free company , sire , and they be call the company . " to the astonishment of the knight , his word provoke a burst of merriment from the baron round , in which the two king and the prince be fain to join . blink mildly from one to the other , until at last perceive a stout knight at his elbow , whose laugh ring somewhat louder than the other , he touch him lightly upon the sleeve . " perchance , my fair sir , " he whisper , " there be some small vow of which i may relieve you . might we not have some honorable debate upon the matter . your gentle courtesy may perhaps grant me an exchange of thrust . " " , nay , , " cry the prince , " fasten not the offence upon , for we be one and all bog in the same mire . truth to say , our ear have just be vex by the doings of the same company , and i have even now make vow to hang the man who hold the rank of captain over it . i little think to find him among the brave of my own chosen chieftain . but the vow be now nought , for , as you have never see your company , it would be a fool 's act to blame you for their doing . " " my liege , " say , " it be a very small matter that i should be hang , albeit the manner of death be somewhat more ignoble than i have hope for . on the other hand , it would be a very grievous thing that you , the of and the flower of knighthood , should make a vow , whether in ignorance or no , and fail to bring it to fulfilment . " " vex not your mind on that , " the prince answer , smile . " we have have a citizen from here this very day , who tell us such a tale of sack and murder and pillage that it move our blood ; but our wrath be turn upon the man who be in authority over them . " " my dear and honor master , " cry , in great anxiety , " i fear me much that in your gentleness of heart you be strain this vow which you have take . if there be so much as a shadow of a doubt as to the form of it , it be a thousand time well -- -- -- " " ! peace ! " cry the prince impatiently . " i be very well able to look to my own vow and their performance . we hope to see you both in the anon . meanwhile you will attend upon us with our train . " he bow , and , pluck by the sleeve , lead them both away to the back of the press of courtier . " why , little coz , " he whisper , " you be very eager to have your neck in a noose . by my soul ! have you ask as much from our new ally , he have not baulk you . between friend , there be overmuch of the hangman in him , and too little of the prince . but indeed this be a rough band , and may take some handling ere you find yourself safe in your captaincy . " " i doubt not , with the help of , that i shall bring them to some order , " answer . " but there be many face here which be new to me , though other have be before me since first i wait upon my dear master , . i pray you to tell me , , who be these priest upon the dais ? " " the one be the archbishop of , , and the other the of . " " and the dark knight with beard ? by my troth , he seem to be a man of much wisdom and valor . " " he be , who , with my unworthy self , be the chief counsellor of the prince , he be high steward and i the seneschal of . " " and the knight upon the right , beside ? " " they be cavalier of who have follow him in his exile . the one at his elbow be , who be as brave and true a man as heart could wish . in front to the right be the gascon lord . you may well tell them by their clouded brow , for there have be some ill-will of late betwixt the prince and them . the tall and burly man be the , whom i doubt not that you know , for a brave knight never lay lance in rest . that cavalier who pluck his skirt and whisper in his ear be , know also as the butcher . he it be who stir up strife , and forever blow the die ember into flame . the man with the mole upon his cheek be the , and his two brother stand behind him , with the , , , , the , and other . further back be knight from , , , , and , with the valiant . that be he in the rose-colored doublet with the ermine . " " and the knight upon this side ? " " they be all englishman , some of the household and other who like yourself , be captain of company . there be , , and , with , , and , who be the brother of the high steward . well the man with the high nose and flaxen beard who have place his hand upon the shoulder of the dark cavalier in the jupon . " " , by ! " observe , " they both bear the print of their armor upon their . methinks they be man who breathe free in a camp than a court . " " there be many of us who do that , , " say , " and the head of the court be , i dare warrant , among them . but of these two man the one be , and the other be . " and crane their neck to have the clear view of these famous warrior , the one a chosen leader of free company , the other a man who by his fierce valor and energy have raise himself from the low rank until he be second only to himself in the esteem of the army . " he have no light hand in war , have , " say . " if he pass through a country you may tell it for some year to come . i have hear that in the north it be still the use to call a house which have but the two gable end leave , without wall or roof , a ' mitre . " " i have often hear of him , " say , " and i have hope to be so far honor as to run a course with him . but hark , , what be amiss with the prince ? " whilst have be converse with the two knight a continuous stream of suitor have be usher in , adventurer seek to sell their sword and merchant clamor over some grievance , a ship detain for the carriage of troop , or a tun of sweet wine which have the bottom knock out by a troop of thirsty archer . a few word from the prince dispose of each case , and , if the applicant like not the judgment , a quick glance from the prince 's dark eye send him to the door with the grievance all go out of him . the young ruler have sit listlessly upon his stool with the two puppet monarch enthrone behind him , but of a sudden a dark shadow pass over his face , and he spring to his foot in one of those gust of passion which be the single blot upon his noble and generous character . " how now , de la ? " he cry . " how now , sirrah ? what message do you bring to us from our brother of ? " the new-comer to whom this abrupt query have be address be a tall and exceedingly handsome cavalier who have just be usher into the apartment . his swarthy cheek and raven black hair speak of the fiery south , and he wear his long black cloak swathe across his chest and over his shoulder in a graceful sweeping fashion , which be neither english nor french . with stately step and many profound bow , he advance to the foot of the dais before reply to the prince 's question . " my powerful and illustrious master , " he begin , " , of , of , of , who also himself of , hereby send his love and greeting to his dear cousin , the of , of , of -- -- -- " " ! tush ! ! " interrupt the prince , who have be beat the ground with his foot impatiently during this stately preamble . " we already know our cousin 's title and style , and , certes , we know our own . to the point , man , and at once . be the pass open to us , or do your master go back from his word pledge to me at no later than last michaelmas ? " " it would ill become my gracious master , sire , to go back from promise give . he do but ask some delay and certain condition and hostage -- -- -- " " condition ! hostage ! be he speak to the of , or be it to the bourgeois provost of some town ! condition , ? he may find much to mend in his own condition ere long . the pass be , then , close to us ? " " , sire -- -- -- " " they be open , then ? " " , sire , if you would but -- -- -- " " , enough , , " cry the prince . " it be a sorry sight to see so true a knight plead in so false a cause . we know the doings of our cousin . we know that while with the right hand he take our fifty thousand crown for the holding of the pass open , he have his left outstretch to of , or to the of , all ready to take as many more for the keep them close . i know our good , and , by my blessed the confessor , he shall learn that i know him . he set his kingdom up to the good bidder , like some scullion farrier sell a horse . he be -- -- -- " " my lord , " cry , " i can stand there to hear such word of my master . do they come from other lip , i should know well how to answer them . " frown and curl his lip , but the prince smile and nod his approbation . " your bearing and your word , , be such i should have look for in you , " he remark . " you will tell the king , your master , that he have be pay his price and that if he hold to his promise he have my word for it that no shall come to his people , nor to their house or gear . if , however , we have not his leave , i shall come close at the heel of this message without his leave , and bear a key with me which shall open all that he may close . " he stoop and whisper to and , who smile as man well please , and hasten from the room . " our cousin have have experience of our friendship , " the prince continue , " and now , by the ! he shall feel a touch of our displeasure . i send now a message to our cousin which his whole kingdom may read . let him take heed lest worse befall him . where be my ? , , i commend this worthy knight to your care . you will see that he have refection , and such a purse of gold as may defray his charge , for indeed it be great honor to any court to have within it so noble and gentle a cavalier . how say you , sire ? " he ask , turn to the spanish refugee , while the herald of be conduct from the chamber by the old warrior . " it be not our custom in to reward pertness in a messenger , " answer , pat the head of his greyhound . " yet we have all hear the length to which your royal generosity run . " " in sooth , yes , " cry the of . " who should know it good than we ? " say bitterly , " since we have have to fly to you in our trouble as to the natural protector of all who be weak . " " , nay , as brother to a brother , " cry the prince , with sparkling eye . " we doubt not , with the help of , to see you very soon restore to those throne from which you have be so traitorously thrust . " " when that happy day come , " say , " then shall be to you as , and , be your project what it may , you may ever count on every troop and every ship over which fly the banner of . " " and , " add the other , " upon every aid which the wealth and power of can bestow . " " touch the hundred thousand crown in which i stand your debtor , " continue carelessly , " it can no doubt -- -- -- " " not a word , sire , not a word ! " cry the prince . " it be not now when you be in grief that i would vex your mind with such base and sordid matter . i have say once and forever that i be yours with every of my army and every florin in my coffer . " " ah ! here be indeed a mirror of chivalry , " say . " i think , , since the prince 's bounty be stretch so far , that we may make further use of his gracious goodness to the extent of fifty thousand crown . good , here , will doubtless settle the matter with you . " the stout old english counsellor look somewhat blank at this prompt acceptance of his master 's bounty . " if it please you , sire , " he say , " the public fund be at their low , see that i have pay twelve thousand man of the company , and the new and the yet come in . if you could wait until the promised help from come -- -- -- " " , nay , my sweet cousin , " cry . " have we know that your own coffer be so low , or that this sorry sum could have weigh one way or the other , we have be loth indeed -- -- -- " " , sire , enough ! " say the prince , flush with vexation . " if the public fund be , indeed , so backward , , there be still , i trust , my own private credit , which have never be draw upon for my own use , but be now ready in the cause of a friend in adversity . go , raise this money upon our own jewel , if nought else may serve , and see that it be pay over to . " " in security i offer -- -- -- " cry . " tush ! tush ! " say the prince . " i be not a , sire . your kingly pledge be my security , without bond or seal . but i have tidings for you , my lord and liege , that our brother of be on his way for our capital with four hundred lance and as many archer to aid us in our venture . when he have come , and when our fair consort be recover in her health , which i trust by the grace of may be ere many week be past , we shall then join the army at , and set our banner to the breeze once more . " a buzz of joy at the prospect of immediate action rise up from the group of warrior . the prince smile at the martial ardor which shine upon every face around him . " it will hearten you to know , " he continue , " that i have sure advice that this be a very valiant leader , and that he have it in his power to make such a stand against us as promise to give us much honor and pleasure . of his own people he have bring together , as i learn , some fifty thousand , with twelve thousand of the french free company , who be , as you know very valiant and expert man-at-arms . it be certain also , that the brave and worthy have ride into to the of , and purpose to take back with him great levy from and . we hold in high esteem , for he have oft before be at great pain to furnish us with an honorable encounter . what think you of it , my worthy ? he take you at , and , by my soul ! you will have the chance now to pay that score . " the gascon warrior wince a little at the allusion , nor be his countryman around him well pleased , for on the only occasion when they have encounter the arm of without english aid they have meet with a heavy defeat . " there be some who say , sire , " say the burly , " that the score be already overpay , for that without gascon help have not be take at , nor have be overbear at . " " by heaven ! but this be too much , " cry an english nobleman . " methinks that be too small a cock to crow so lustily . " " the small cock , my , may have the long spur , " remark the . " may have its comb clip if it make noise , " break in an englishman . " by our of ! " cry the of , " this be more than i can abide . , you shall answer to me for those word ! " " freely , my lord , and when you will , " return the englishman carelessly . " my , " cry , " you look somewhat fixedly in my direction . by 's soul ! i should be right glad to go further into the matter with you . " " and you , my of , " say , push his way to the front , " it be in my mind that we might break a lance in gentle and honorable debate over the question . " for a moment a dozen challenge flash backwards and forwards at this sudden burst of the cloud which have lower so long between the knight of the two nation . furious and gesticulate the , white and cold and sneer the , while the prince with a half smile glance from one party to the other , like a man who love to dwell upon a fiery scene , and yet dread least the mischief go so far that he might find it beyond his control . " friend , friend ! " he cry at last , " this quarrel must go no further . the man shall answer to me , be he or , who carry it beyond this room . i have overmuch need for your sword that you should turn them upon each other . , , you do not doubt the courage of our friend of ? " " not i , sire , " answer . " i have see them fight too often not to know that they be very hardy and valiant gentleman . " " and so say i , " quoth the other englishman ; " but , certes , there be no fear of our forget it while they have a tongue in their head . " " , , " say the prince reprovingly , " all people have their own use and custom . there be some who might call us cold and dull and silent . but you hear , my lord of , that these gentleman have no think to throw a slur upon your honor or your valor , so let all anger fade from your mind . , , , i have your word ? " " we be your subject , sire , " say the gascon baron , though with no very good grace . " your word be our law . " " then shall we bury all cause of unkindness in a flagon of , " say the prince , cheerily . " , there ! the door of the ! i have be over long from my sweet spouse but i shall be back with you anon . let the sewer serve and the minstrel play , while we drain a cup to the brave day that be before us in the south ! " he turn away , accompany by the two monarch , while the rest of the company , with many a compress lip and menace eye , file slowly through the to the great chamber in which the royal table be set forth . whilst the prince 's council be sit , and have remain in the outer hall , where they be soon surround by a noisy group of young englishman of their own rank , all eager to hear the late news from . " how be it with the old man at ? " ask one . " and how with the good ? " " and how with ? " cry a third . " the devil take your tongue , ! " shout a tall young man , seize the last speaker by the collar and give him an admonitory shake . " the prince would take your head off for those word . " " by 's coif ! would miss it but little , " say another . " it be as empty as a beggar 's wallet . " " as empty as an english squire , coz , " cry the first speaker . " what a devil have become of the and his sewer ? they have not put forth the trestle yet . " " ! if a man could eat himself into knighthood , , you have be a banneret at the least , " observe another , amid a burst of laughter . " and if you could drink yourself in , old , you have be first baron of the realm , " cry the aggrieve . " but how of , my lad of ? " " i take it , " say , " that it be much as it be when you be there last , save that perchance there be a little less noise there . " " and why less noise , young ? " " ah , that be for your wit to discover . " " ! here be a paladin come over , with the mud still stick to his shoe . he mean that the noise be less for our be out of the country . " " they be very quick in these part , " say , turn to . " how be we to take this , sir ? " ask the ruffle squire . " you may take it as it come , " say carelessly . " here be pertness ! " cry the other . " , i honor your truthfulness , " say . " stint it , , " say the tall squire , with a burst of laughter . " you will have little credit from this gentleman , i perceive . tongue be sharp in , sir . " " and sword ? " " hum ! we may prove that . in two day ' time be the , when we may see if your lance be as quick as your wit . " " all very well , , " cry a burly , bull-necked young man , whose square shoulder and massive limb tell of exceptional personal strength . " you pass too lightly over the matter . we be not to be so easily . the have give his proof ; but we know nothing of his squire , save that one of them have a railing tongue . and how of you , young sir ? " bring his heavy hand down on 's shoulder . " and what of me , young sir ? " " ! this be my lady 's page come over . your cheek will be brown and your hand harder ere you see your mother again . " " if my hand be not hard , it be ready . " " ready ? ready for what ? for the hem of my lady 's train ? " " ready to chastise insolence , sir , " cry with flash eye . " sweet little coz ! " answer the burly squire . " such a dainty color ! such a mellow voice ! eye of a bashful maid , and hair like a three year ' babe ! voila ! " he pass his thick finger roughly through the youth 's crisp golden curl . " you seek to force a quarrel , sir , " say the young man , white with anger . " and what then ? " " why , you do it like a country boor , and not like a gentle squire . be ill breed and as ill teach . i serve a master who could show you how such thing should be do . " " and how would he do it , o pink of squire ? " " he would neither be loud nor would he be unmannerly , but rather more gentle than be his wont . he would say , ' , i should take it as an honor to do some small deed of arm against you , not for mine own glory or advancement , but rather for the fame of my lady and for the uphold of chivalry . ' then he would draw his glove , thus , and throw it on the ground ; or , if he have cause to think that he have to deal with a churl , he might throw it in his i do now ! " a buzz of excitement go up from the knot of squire as , his gentle nature turn by this causeless attack into fiery resolution , dash his glove with all his strength into the sneering face of his antagonist . from all part of the hall squire and page come run , until a dense , sway crowd surround the disputant . " your life for this ! " say the bully , with a face which be distort with rage . " if you can take it , " return . " good lad ! " whisper . " stick to it close as wax . " " i shall see justice , " cry , 's silent attendant . " you bring it upon yourself , , " say the tall squire , who have be address as . " you must ever plague the new-comer . but it be shame if this go further . the lad have show a proper spirit . " " but a blow ! a blow ! " cry several of the old squire . " there must be a finish to this . " " ; first lay hand upon his head , " say . " how say you , ? the matter may rest where it stand ? " " my name be know in these part , " say , proudly , " i can let pass what might leave a stain upon another . let him pick up his glove and say that he have do amiss . " " i would see him in the claw of the devil first , " whisper . " you hear , young sir ? " say the peacemaker . " our friend will overlook the matter if you do but say that you have act in heat and haste . " " i can say that , " answer . " it be our custom , young sir , when new squire come amongst us from , to test them in some such way . bethink you that if a man have a destrier or a new lance he will ever try it in time of peace , lest in day of need it may fail him . how much more then be it proper to test those who be our comrade in arm . " " i would draw out if it may honorably be do , " murmur in 's ear . " the man be a noted swordsman and far above your strength . " come , however , of that sturdy saxon blood which be very slowly heat , but once up not easily to be cool . the hint of danger which throw out be the one thing need to harden his resolution . " i come here at the back of my master , " he say , " and i look on every man here as an englishman and a friend . this gentleman have show me a rough welcome , and if i have answer him in the same spirit he have but himself to thank . i will pick the glove up ; but , certes , i shall abide what i have do unless he first crave my pardon for what he have say and do . " shrug his shoulder . " you have do what you could to save him , , " say he . " we have well settle at once . " " so say i , " cry . " the council will not break up until the banquet , " remark a gray-haired squire . " you have a clear two hour . " " and the place ? " " the be empty at this hour . " " ; it must not be within the ground of the court , or it may go hard with all concerned if it come to the ear of the prince . " " but there be a quiet spot near the river , " say one youth . " we have but to pass through the abbey ground , along the armory wall , past the church of , and so down the . " " en avant , then ! " cry shortly , and the whole assembly flock out into the open air , save only those whom the special order of their master hold to their post . these unfortunate crowd to the small casement , and crane their neck after the throng as far as they could catch a glimpse of them . close to the bank of the there lie a little tract of green sward , with the high wall of a prior 's garden upon one side and an orchard with a thick bristle of leafless upon the other . the river run deep and swift up to the steep bank ; but there be few boat upon it , and the ship be moor far out in the centre of the stream . here the two combatant draw their sword and throw off their doublet , for neither have any defensive armor . the duello with its stately etiquette have not yet come into vogue , but rough and sudden encounter be as common as they must ever be when hot-headed youth go abroad with a weapon strap to its waist . in such combat , as well as in the more formal sport of the , have win a name for strength and dexterity which have cause to utter his well-meant warning . on the other hand , have use his weapon in constant exercise and practice on every day for many month , and be by nature quick of eye and prompt of hand , he might pass now as no mean swordsman . a strangely oppose pair they appear as they approach each other : dark and stout and stiff , with hairy chest and corded arm , a model of comeliness and grace , with his golden hair and his skin as fair as a woman 's . an unequal fight it seem to most ; but there be a few , and they the most experienced , who see something in the youth 's steady gray eye and wary step which leave the issue open to doubt . " hold , sir , hold ! " cry , ere a blow have be strike . " this gentleman have a two-handed sword , a good foot longer than that of our friend . " " take mine , , " say . " nay , friend , " he answer , " i understand the weight and balance of mine own . to work , sir , for our lord may need us at the abbey ! " 's great sword be indeed a mighty vantage in his favor . he stand with his foot close together , his knee bent outward , ready for a dash inwards or a spring out . the weapon he hold straight up in front of him with blade erect , so that he might either bring it down with a swing blow , or by a turn of the heavy blade he might guard his own head and body . a further protection lie in the broad and powerful guard which cross the hilt , and which be furnish with a deep and narrow notch , in which an expert swordsman might catch his foeman 's blade , and by a quick turn of his wrist might snap it across . , on the other hand , must trust for his defence to his quick eye and active his sword , though keen as a whetstone could make it , be of a light and graceful build with a narrow , sloping pommel and a taper steel . well know his advantage and lose no time in put it to use . as his opponent walk towards him he suddenly bound forward and send in a whistling cut which would have sever the other in twain have he not spring lightly back from it . so close be it that the point rip a gash in the jut edge of his linen . quick as a panther , spring in with a thrust , but , who be as active as he be strong , have already recover himself and turn it aside with a movement of his heavy blade . again he whiz in a blow which make the spectator hold their breath , and again very quickly and swiftly slip from under it , and send back two lightning thrust which the other could scarce parry . so close be they to each other that have no time to spring back from the next cut , which beat down his sword and graze his forehead , send the blood stream into his eye and down his cheek . he spring out beyond sword sweep , and the pair stand breathe heavily , while the crowd of young squire buzz their applause . " bravely strike on both side ! " cry . " you have both win honor from this meeting , and it would be sin and shame to let it go further . " " you have do enough , , " say . " you have carry yourself well , " cry several of the old squire . " for my part , i have no wish to slay this young man , " say , wipe his heated brow . " do this gentleman crave my pardon for have use me despitefully ? " ask . " nay , not i. " " then stand on your guard , sir ! " with a clatter and dash the two blade meet once more , press in so as to keep within the full sweep of the heavy blade , while as continually spring back to have space for one of his fatal cut . a blow draw blood from 's left shoulder , but at the same moment he wound slightly upon the thigh . next instant , however , his blade have slip into the fatal notch , there be a sharp crack sound with a tinkling upon the ground , and he find a splinter piece of steel fifteen inch long be all that remain to him of his weapon . " your life be in my hand ! " cry , with a bitter smile . " nay , nay , he make submission ! " broke in several squire . " another sword ! " cry . " , sir , " say , " that be not the custom . " " throw down your hilt , , " cry . " never ! " say . " do you crave my pardon , sir ? " " you be mad to ask it . " " then on guard again ! " cry the young squire , and spring in with a fire and a fury which more than make up for the shortness of his weapon . it have not escape him that his opponent be breathe in short , hoarse gasp , like a man who be dizzy with fatigue . now be the time for the pure living and the more agile limb to show their value . back and back give , ever seek time for a last cut . on and on come , his jagged point now at his foeman 's face , now at his throat , now at his chest , still stab and thrust to pass the line of steel which cover him . yet his experienced foeman know well that such effort could not be long sustain . let him relax for one instant , and his death-blow have come . relax he must ! flesh and blood could not stand the strain . already the thrust be less fierce , the foot less ready , although there be no abatement of the spirit in the steady gray eye . , cunning and wary from year of fighting , know that his chance have come . he brush aside the frail weapon which be oppose to him , whirl up his great blade , spring back to get the fair vanish into the water of the . so intent have the squire , both combatant and spectator , be on the matter in hand , that all think of the steep bank and swift still stream have go from their mind . it be not until , give back before the other 's fiery rush , be upon the very brink , that a general cry warn him of his danger . that last spring , which he hope would have bring the fight to a bloody end , carry him clear of the edge , and he find himself in an instant eight foot deep in the ice-cold stream . once and twice his gasp face and clutch finger break up through the still green water , sweep outward in the swirl of the current . in vain be , and belt link together throw out to him by his companion . have drop his shattered sword and be stand , tremble in every limb , with his rage all change in an instant to pity . for the third time the drown man come to the surface , his hand full of green slimy , his eye turn in despair to the shore . their glance fall upon , and he could not withstand the mute appeal which he read in them . in an instant he , too , be in the , strike out with powerful stroke for his late foeman . yet the current be swift and strong , and , good swimmer as he be , it be no easy task which have set himself . to clutch at and to seize him by the hair be the work of a few second , but to hold his head above water and to make their way out of the current be another matter . for a hundred stroke he do not seem to gain an inch . then at last , amid a shout of joy and praise from the bank , they slowly draw clear into more stagnant water , at the instant that a rope , make of a dozen link together by the buckle , be throw by into their very hand . three pull from eager arm , and the two combatant , drip and pale , be drag up the bank , and lie pant upon the grass . be the first to come to himself , for although he have be long in the water , he have do nothing during that fierce battle with the current . he stagger to his foot and look down upon his rescuer , who have raise himself upon his elbow , and be smile faintly at the buzz of congratulation and of praise which break from the squire around him . " i be much beholden to you , sir , " say , though in no very friendly voice . " certes , i should have be in the river now but for you , for i be bear in , which be but a dry county , and there be few who swim in those part . " " i ask no thank , " answer shortly . " give me your hand to rise , . " " the river have be my enemy , " say , " but it have be a good friend to you , for it have save your life this day . " " that be as it may be , " return . " but all be now well over , " quoth , " and no come of it , which be more than i have at one time hope for . our young friend here have very fairly and honestly earn his right to be craftsman of the honorable of the of . here be your doublet , . " " alas for my poor sword which lie at the bottom of the ! " say the squire . " here be your pourpoint , , " cry . " throw it over your shoulder , that you may have at least one dry garment . " " and now away back to the abbey ! " say several . " one moment , sir , " cry , who be lean on 's shoulder , with the break sword , which he have pick up , still clutch in his right hand . " my ear may be somewhat dull by the water , and perchance what have be say have escape me , but i have not yet hear this gentleman crave pardon for the insult which he put upon me in the hall . " " what ! do you still pursue the quarrel ? " ask . " and why not , sir ? i be slow to take up such thing , but once afoot i shall follow it while i have life or breath . " " ! you have not too much of either , for you be as white as marble , " say bluntly . " take my rede , sir , and let it drop , for you have come very well out from it . " " , " say , " this quarrel be none of my making ; but , now that i be here , i swear to you that i shall never leave this spot until i have that which i have come for : so ask my pardon , sir , or choose another glaive and to it again . " the young squire be deadly white from his exertion , both on the land and in the water . soak and stain , with a smear of blood on his white shoulder and another on his brow , there be still in his whole pose and set of face the trace of an inflexible resolution . his opponent 's dull and more material mind quail before the fire and intensity of a high spiritual nature . " i have not think that you have take it so amiss , " say he awkwardly . " it be but such a jest as we play upon each other , and , if you must have it so , i be sorry for it . " " then i be sorry too , " quoth warmly , " and here be my hand upon it . " " and the horn have blow three time , " quoth , as they all stream in chatter group from the ground . " i know not what the prince 's will say or think . by my troth ! master , your friend here be in need of a cup of wine , for he have drink deeply of water . i have not think from his fair face that he have stand to this matter so shrewdly . " " faith , " say , " this air of have turn our turtle-dove into a . a mild or more courteous youth never come out of . " " his master also , as i understand , be a very mild and courteous gentleman , " remark ; " yet i do not think that they be either of them man with whom it be very safe to trifle . " even the squire ' table at the of 's at be on a very sumptuous scale while the prince hold his court there . here first , after the meagre fare of and the stint board of the , learn the length to which luxury and refinement might be push . roast peacock , with the feather all carefully replace , so that the bird lie upon the dish even as it have strut in life , boar ' head with the tusk gild and the mouth line with silver foil , jelly in the shape of the , and a great pasty which form an exact model of the king 's new castle at be a few of the strange dish which face him . an archer have bring him a change of clothes from the cog , and he have already , with the elasticity of youth , shake off the trouble and fatigue of the morning . a page from the inner have come with word that their master intend to drink wine at the lodging of the that night , and that he desire his squire to sleep at the hotel of the " " on the . thither then they both set out in the twilight after the long course of juggle trick and with which the principal meal be conclude . a thin rain be fall as the two youth , with their cloak over their head , make their way on foot through the street of the old town , leave their horse in the royal stable . an occasional oil lamp at the corner of a street , or in the portico of some wealthy burgher , throw a faint glimmer over the shine cobblestone , and the varied motley crowd who , in spite of the weather , ebb and flow along every highway . in those scattered circle of dim radiance might be see the whole busy panorama of life in a wealthy and martial city . here pass the round-faced burgher , swell with prosperity , his sweeping gaberdine , flat velvet cap , broad leather belt and dangling pouch all speaking of comfort and of wealth . behind him his serve wench , her blue over her head , and one hand thrust forth to bear the lanthorn which throw a golden bar of light along her master 's path . behind them a group of swagger , dalesman , speak a dialect which their own countryman could scarce comprehend , their jerkin mark with the pelican , which show that they have come over in the train of the north-country . the burgher glance back at their fierce face and quicken his step , while the girl pull her closer round her , for there be a meaning in their wild eye , as they stare at the purse and the maiden , which man of all tongue could understand . then come archer of the guard , woman of the camp , english page with their fair skin and blue wonder eye , friar , lounge man-at-arms , swarthy gascon , seaman from the river , rude peasant of the , and and squire of the court , all jostle and push in an ever-changing , stream , while , , , , and the varied dialect of and fill the air with their babel . from time to time the throng would be burst asunder and a lady 's would trot past towards the abbey , or there would come a knot of archer walk in front of gascon baron or english knight , as he seek his lodging after the palace revel . clatter of hoof , clink of weapon , shout from the drunken brawler , and high laughter of woman , they all rise up , like the mist from a marsh , out of the crowded street of the city . one couple out of the move throng especially engage the attention of the two young squire , the more so as they be go in their own direction and immediately in front of them . they consist of a man and a girl , the former very tall with rounded shoulder , a limp of one foot , and a large flat object cover with dark cloth under his arm . his companion be young and straight , with a quick , elastic step and graceful bearing , though so swathe in a black mantle that little could be see of her face save a flash of dark eye and a curve of raven hair . the tall man lean heavily upon her to take the weight off his tender foot , while he hold his burden betwixt himself and the wall , cuddle it jealously to his side , and thrust forward his young companion to act as a buttress whenever the pressure of the crowd threaten to bear him away . the evident anxiety of the man , the appearance of his attendant , and the joint care with which they defend their conceal possession , excite the interest of the two young englishman who walk within of them . " courage , child ! " they hear the tall man exclaim in strange hybrid french . " if we can win another sixty pace we be safe . " " hold it safe , father , " the other answer , in the same soft , mincing dialect . " we have no cause for fear . " " verily , they be heathen and barbarian , " cry the man ; " mad , howl , drunken barbarian ! forty more pace , , and i swear to the holy , patron of all learn craftsman , that i will never set foot over my door again until the whole swarm be safely hive in their camp of , or wherever else they curse with their presence . twenty more pace , my treasure ! ah , my ! how they push and brawl ! get in their way , ! put your little elbow bravely out ! set your shoulder squarely against them , girl ! why should you give way to these mad islander ? ah , ! we be ruin and destroy ! " the crowd have thicken in front , so that the lame man and the girl have come to a stand . several english archer , attract , as the squire have be , by their singular appearance , be face towards them , and peer at them through the dim light . " by the three king ! " cry one , " here be an old dotard shrew to have so goodly a crutch ! use the leg that have give you , man , and do not bear so heavily upon the wench . " " twenty devil fly away with him ! " shout another . " what , how , man ! be brave archer to go while an old man use one as a ? " " come with me , my ! " cry a third , pluck at the girl 's mantle . " nay , with me , my heart 's desire ! " say the first . " by ! our life be short , and we should be merry while we may . may i never see again , if she be not a right winsome lass ! " " what have the old toad under his arm ? " cry one of the other . " he hug it to him as the devil hug the pardoner . " " let us see , old bag of bone ; let us see what it be that you have under your arm ! " they crowd in upon him , while he , ignorant of their language , could but clutch the girl with one hand and the parcel with the other , look wildly about in search of help . " nay , lad , nay ! " cry , push back the near archer . " this be but scurvy conduct . keep your hand off , or it will be the bad for you . " " keep your tongue still , or it will be the bad for you , " shout the most drunken of the archer . " who be you to spoil sport ? " " a raw squire , new land , " say another . " by of ! we be at the beck of our master , but we be not to be order by every babe whose mother have send him as far as . " " oh , gentleman , " cry the girl in break french , " for dear 's sake stand by us , and do not let these terrible man do us an injury . " " have no fear , lady , " answer . " we shall see that all be well with you . take your hand from the girl 's wrist , you north-country rogue ! " " hold to her , ! " say a great man-at-arms , whose steel breast-plate glimmer in the dusk . " keep your hand from your bodkin , you two , for that be my trade before you be bear , and , by 's soul ! i will drive a handful of steel through you if you move a finger . " " thank ! " say suddenly , as he spy in the a shock of blaze red hair which fringe a steel cap high above the head of the crowd . " here be , and , too ! help us , comrade , for there be wrong be do to this maid and to the old man . " " , petit , " say the old bowman , push his way through the crowd , with the huge forester at his heel . " what be all this , then ? by the twang of string ! i think that you will have some work upon your hand if you be to right all the wrong that you may see upon this side of the water . it be not to be think that a troop of bowman , with the wine buzz in their ear , will be as soft-spoken as so many young clerk in an orchard . when you have be a year with the company you will think less of such matter . but what be amiss here ? the with his archer be come this way , and some of you may find in the , if you take not heed . " " why , it be old of the company ! " shout the man-at-arms . " why , , what have come upon ? i can call to mind the day when you be as roar a blade as ever call himself a free companion . by my soul ! from to , who be there who would kiss a wench or cut a throat as readily as bowman of 's company ? " " like enough , , " say , " and , by my hilt ! i may not have change so much . but it be ever a fair loose and a clear mark with me . the wench must be willing , or the man must be stand up against me , else , by these ten finger bone ! either be safe enough for me . " a glance at 's resolute face , and at the huge shoulder of , have convince the archer that there be little to be get by violence . the girl and the old man begin to shuffle on in the crowd without their tormentor venture to stop them . and follow slowly behind them , but catch the latter by the shoulder . " by my hilt ! , " say he , " i hear that you have do great thing at the , but i pray you to have a care , for it be i who bring you into the company , and it would be a black day for me if aught be to befall you . " " , , i will have a care . " " thrust not forward into danger too much , petit . in a little time your wrist will be strong and your cut more shrewd . there will be some of us at the ' ' , which be two door from the hotel of the ' half moon , ' so if you would drain a cup with a few simple archer you will be right welcome . " promise to be there if his duty would allow , and then , slip through the crowd , he rejoin , who be stand in talk with the two stranger , who have now reach their own doorstep . " brave young signor , " cry the tall man , throw his arm round , " how can we thank you enough for take our part against those horrible drunken barbarian . what should we have do without you ? would have be drag away , and my head would have be shiver into a thousand fragment . " " nay , i scarce think that they would have mishandle you so , " say in surprise . " , ! " cry he with a high crow laugh , " it be not the head upon my shoulder that i think of . ! no . it be the head under my arm which you have preserve . " " perhaps the signori would deign to come under our roof , father , " say the maiden . " if we bide here , who know that some fresh tumult may not break out . " " well say , ! well say , my girl ! i pray you , sir , to honor my unworthy roof so far . a light , ! there be five step up . now two more . so ! here we be at last in safety . di ! i would not have give ten maravedi for my head when those child of the devil be push us against the wall . , you have be a brave girl , and it be good that you should be pull and push than that my head should be break . " " yes indeed , father , " say she earnestly . " but those ! ! take a goth , a , and a vandal , mix them together and add a rover ; then take this creature and make him you have an englishman . ! be ever such people upon earth ! what place be free from them ? i hear that they swarm in even as they swarm here . everywhere you will find them , except in heaven . " " dear father , " cry , still support the angry old man , as he limp up the curve oaken stair . " you must not forget that these good signori who have preserve us be also english . " " ah , yes . my pardon , sir ! come into my room here . there be some who might find some pleasure in these painting , but i learn the art of war be the only art which be hold in honor in your island . " the , room into which he conduct them be brilliantly light by four scent oil lamp . against the wall , upon the table , on the floor , and in every part of the chamber be great sheet of glass paint in the most brilliant color . and gaze around them in amazement , for never have they see such magnificent work of art . " you like them then , " the lame artist cry , in answer to the look of pleasure and of surprise in their face . " there be then some of you who have a taste for such trifle . " " i could not have believe it , " exclaim . " what color ! what outline ! see to this martyrdom of the holy , . could you not yourself pick up one of these stone which lie to the hand of the wicked murtherer ? " " and see this stag , , with the cross betwixt its horn . by my faith ! i have never see a good one at the of . " " and the green of this bright and clear ! why all the painting that i have see be but child 's play beside this . this worthy gentleman must be one of those great painter of whom i have oft hear brother speak in the old day at . " the dark mobile face of the artist shine with pleasure at the unaffected delight of the two young englishman . his daughter have throw off her mantle and disclose a face of the fine and most delicate italian beauty , which soon draw 's eye from the picture in front of him . , however , continue with little cry of admiration and of wonderment to turn from the wall to the table and yet again to the wall . " what think you of this , young sir ? " ask the painter , tear off the cloth which conceal the flat object which he have bear beneath his arm . it be a sheet of glass bear upon it a face with a halo round it , so delicately outline , and of so perfect a tint , that it might have be indeed a human face which gaze with sad and thoughtful eye upon the young squire . he clap his hand , with that thrill of joy which true art will ever give to a true artist . " it be great ! " he cry . " it be wonderful ! but i marvel , sir , that you should have risk a work of such beauty and value by bear it at night through so unruly a crowd . " " i have indeed be rash , " say the artist . " some wine , , from the flask ! have it not be for you , i tremble to think of what might have come of it . see to the skin tint : it be not to be replace , for paint as you will , it be not once in a hundred time that it be not either burn too brown in the furnace or else the color will not hold , and you get but a sickly white . there you can see the very vein and the throb of the blood . yes , ! if it have break , my heart would have break too . it be for the choir window in the church of , and we have go , my little helper and i , to see if it be indeed of the size for the stonework . have fall ere we finish , and what could we do save carry it home as good we might ? but you , young sir , you speak as if you too know something of the art . " " so little that i scarce dare speak of it in your presence , " answer . " i have be , and it be no very great matter to handle the brush well than my brother novice . " " there be pigment , brush , and paper , " say the old artist . " i do not give you glass , for that be another matter , and take much skill in the mix of color . now i pray you to show me a touch of your art . i thank you , ! the venetian glass , , and fill them to the brim . a seat , signor ! " while , in his , be converse with in her , the old man be carefully examine his precious head to see that no scratch have be leave upon its surface . when he glance up again , have , with a few bold stroke of the brush , tint in a woman 's face and neck upon the white sheet in front of him . " ! " exclaim the old artist , stand with his head on one side , " you have power ; yes , ! you have power , it be the face of an angel ! " " it be the face of the ! " cry , even more astonish . " why , on my faith , it be not unlike her ! " say , in some confusion . " ah ! a portrait ! so much the well . young man , i be , the son of , and i say again that you have power . further , i say , that , if you will stay with me , i will teach you all the secret of the ' mystery : the pigment and their thickening , which will fuse into the glass and which will not , the furnace and the trick and method you shall know . " " i would be right glad to study under such a master , " say ; " but i be swear to follow my lord whilst this war last . " " war ! war ! " cry the old italian . " ever this talk of war . and the man that you hold to be be they ? have i not hear their name ? soldier , butcher , destroyer ! ah , per ! we have man in who be in very truth great . you pull down , you despoil ; but they build up , they restore . ah , if you could but see my own dear , the , the cloister of , the high , with the mellow throb of her bell upon the warm italian air ! those be the work of great man . and i have see them with my own eye , these very eye which look upon you . i have see , , , , whose very color i be not worthy to mix . and i have see the age , and he in turn be pupil to , before whom there be no art in , for the be bring to paint the chapel of the at . ah , signori , there be the real great man whose name will be hold in honor when your soldier be show to have be the enemy of humankind . " " faith , sir , " say , " there be something to say for the soldier also , for , unless they be defend , how be all these gentleman whom you have mention to preserve the picture which they have paint ? " " and all these ! " say . " have you indeed do them all ? -- where be they to go ? " " yes , signor , they be all from my hand . some be , as you see , upon one sheet , and some be in many piece which may fasten together . there be some who do but paint upon the glass , and then , by place another sheet of glass upon the top and fasten it , they keep the air from their painting . yet i hold that the true art of my craft lie as much in the furnace as in the brush . see this rose window , which be from the model of the church of the at , and this other of the ' find of the grail , ' which be for the apse of the church . time be when none but my countryman could do these thing ; but there be of and other in who be very worthy workman . but , ! there be that ever shriek brazen tongue which will not let us forget for one short hour that it be the arm of the savage , and not the hand of the master , which rule over the world . " a stern , clear bugle call have sound close at hand to summon some follow together for the night . " it be a sign to us as well , " say . " i would fain stay here forever amid all these beautiful -- " stare hard at the blush as he we must be back at our lord 's hostel ere he reach it . " amid renewed thank and with promise to come again , the two squire bid their leave of the old italian and his daughter . the street be clear now , and the rain have stop , so they make their way quickly from the , in which their new friend dwell , to the , where the hostel of the " " be situate . " ! , see you ever so lovely a face ? " cry as they hurry along together . " so pure , so peaceful , and so beautiful ! " " in sooth , yes . and the hue of the skin the most perfect that ever i see . mark you also how the hair curl round the brow ? it be wonder fine . " " those eye , too ! " cry . " how clear and how , and yet so full of thought ! " " if there be a weakness it be in the chin , " say . " . i see none . " " it be well curve , it be true . " " most daintily so . " " and yet -- -- -- " " what then , ? wouldst find flaw in the sun ? " " well , bethink you , , would not more power and expression have be put into the face by a long and noble beard ? " " ! " cry , " the man be mad . a beard on the face of little ! " " ! who speak of ? " " who speak of aught else ? " " it be the picture of , man , of which i have be discourse . " " you be indeed , " cry , laugh , " a goth , , and , with all the other hard name which the old man call us . how could you think so much of a smear of pigment , when there be such a picture paint by the good himself in the very room with you ? but who be this ? " " if it please you , sir , " say an archer , run across to them , " and other would be right glad to see you . they be within here . he bid me say to you that the will not need your service , as he sleep with the . " " by my faith ! " say , " we do not need a guide to lead us to their presence . " as he speak there come a roar of sing from the tavern upon the right , with shout of laughter and stamp of foot . pass under a low door , and down a passage , they find themselves in a long narrow hall light up by a pair of blaze torch , one at either end . truss of straw have be throw down along the wall , and recline on them be some twenty or thirty archer , all of the company , their steel cap and jack throw off , their tunic open and their great limb sprawl upon the clay floor . at every man 's elbow stand his leathern blackjack of beer , while at the further end a hogshead with its end knock in promise an abundant supply for the future . behind the hogshead , on a half circle of keg , box , and rude settle , sit , , and three or four other lead man of the archer , together with , the , who have leave his yellow cog in the river to have a last rouse with his friend of the company . and take their seat between and , without their entrance checking in any degree the hubbub which be go on . " ale , mes ? " cry the bowman , " or shall it be wine ? nay , but must have the one or the other . here , , thou limb of the devil , bring a of the old , and see that you do not shake it . hear the news ? " " , " cry both the squire . " that we be to have a brave tourney . " " a tourney ? " " aye , lad . for the have swear that he will find five knight from this side of the water who will ride over any five englishman who ever throw leg over saddle ; and have take up the challenge , and the prince have promise a golden vase for the man who carry himself well , and all the court be in a buzz over it . " " why should the knight have all the sport ? " growl . " could they not set up five archer for the honor of and of ? " " or five man-at-arms , " say . " but who be the english knight ? " ask . " there be three hundred and in the town , " say , " and i hear that three hundred and forty cartel and defiance have already be send in , the only one missing being , who be in his bed with the sweat sickness , and can set foot to ground . " " i have hear of it from one of the archer of the guard , " cry a bowman from among the straw ; " i hear that the prince wish to break a lance , but that would not hear of it , for the game be likely to be a rough one . " " then there be . " " , the prince would not permit it . he be to be marshal of the list , with and the . the will be the , , , , and our own very good lord and leader . " " hurrah for him , and be with him ! " cry several . " it be honor to draw string in his service . " " so you may well say , " say . " by my ten ! if you march behind the pennon of the five rose you be like to see all that a good bowman would wish to see . ! yes , mes garcon , you laugh , but , by my hilt ! you may not laugh when you find where he will take you , for you can never tell what strange vow he may not have swear to . i see that he have a patch over his eye , even as he have at . there will come bloodshed of that patch , or i be the more mistaken . " " how chance it at , good ? " ask one of the young archer , lean upon his elbow , with his eye fix respectfully upon the old bowman 's rugged face . " aye , , tell us of it , " cry . " here be to old ! " shout several at the further end of the room , wave their blackjack in the air . " ask him ! " say modestly , nod towards . " he see more than i do . and yet , by the holy nail ! there be not very much that i do not see either . " " ah , yes , " say , shake his head , " it be a great day . i never hope to see such another . there be some fine archer who draw their last shaft that day . we shall never see good man , . " " by my hilt ! no . there be little , and , and , who break the neck of the german . ! what man they be ! take them how you would , at long butt or short , , round , or rover , good bowman never twirl a shaft over their . " " but the fight , , the fight ! " cry several impatiently . " let me fill my jack first , boy , for it be a thirsty tale . it be at the first fall of the leaf that the prince set forth , and he pass through auvergne , and , and , and . in auvergne the maid be kind , but the wine be sour . in it be the woman that be sour , but the wine be rich . , however , be a very good land for bowman , for wine and woman be all that heart could wish . in i get nothing save a break pate , but at i have a great good fortune , for i have a golden pyx from the minster , for which i afterwards get nine jane from the goldsmith in the . from thence we go to , where i have a tunic of silk and a very fine pair of shoe with tassel of silk and drop of silver . " " from a stall , ? " ask one of the young archer . " nay , from a man 's foot , lad . i have reason to think that he might not need them again , see that a shaft have feather in his back . " " and what then , ? " " on we go , coz , some six thousand of us , until we come to , and there again a very great thing befall . " " a battle , ? " " , nay ; a great thing than that . there be little to be gain out of a battle , unless one have the fortune to win a ransom . at and three welshman come upon a house which all other have pass , and we have the profit of it to ourselves . for myself , i have a fine thing which you will not see in a long day 's journey in . you have see it , , and you , . you will bear me out that it be a noble bed . we put it on a sutler 's mule , and bear it after the army . it be on my mind that i would lay it by until i come to start house of mine own , and i have it now in a very safe place near . " " and what then , ? " ask . " by ! it be indeed a fair and goodly life which you have choose , for you gather up the spoil as a man gather lobster , without grace or favor from any man . " " you be right , , " say another of the old archer . " it be an old bowyer 's rede that the second feather of a fenny goose be good than the pinion of a tame one . draw on old lad , for i have come between you and the clout . " " on we go then , " say , after a long pull at his blackjack . " there be some six thousand of us , with the prince and his knight , and the feather-bed upon a sutler 's mule in the centre . we make great havoc in , until we come into , where i chance upon a gold chain and two bracelet of jasper , which be steal from me the same day by a black-eyed wench from the . ! there be some folk who have no fear of in them , and no sign of grace in their soul , for ever clutch and claw at another man 's chattel . " " but the battle , , the battle ! " cry several , amid a burst of laughter . " i come to it , my young . well , then , the of have follow us with fifty thousand man , and he make great haste to catch us , but when he have us he scarce know what to do with us , for we be so draw up among hedge and vineyard that they could not come nigh us , save by one lane . on both side be archer , man-at-arms and knight behind , and in the centre the baggage , with my feather-bed upon a sutler 's mule . three hundred chosen knight come straight for it , and , indeed , they be very brave man , but such a drift of arrow meet them that few come back . then come the , and they also fight very bravely , so that one or two break through the archer and come as far as the feather-bed , but all to no purpose . then out ride our own little hothead with the patch over his eye , and my with his four squire , and a few other of like kidney , and after them go the prince and , and then the whole throng of us , with axe and sword , for we have shoot away our arrow . ! it be a foolish thing , for we come forth from the hedge , and there be naught to guard the baggage have they ride round behind us . but all go well with us , and the king be take , and little and i fall in with a wain with twelve firkin of wine for the king 's own table , and , by my hilt ! if you ask me what happen after that , i can answer you , nor can little either . " " and next day ? " " by my faith ! we do not tarry long , but we hie back to , where we come in safety with the of and also the feather-bed . i sell my spoil , mes garcon , for as many as i could hold in my , and for seven day i light twelve wax candle upon the altar of ; for if you forget the blessed when thing be well with you , they be very likely to forget you when you have need of them . i have a score of one hundred and nineteen pound of wax against the holy , and , as he be a very just man , i doubt not that i shall have full weigh and measure when i have most need of it . " " tell me , master , " cry a young fresh-faced archer at the further end of the room , " what be this great battle about ? " " why , you , what would it be about save who should wear the crown of ? " " i think that mayhap it might be as to who should have this feather-bed of thine . " " if i come down to you , , i may lay my belt across your shoulder , " answer , amid a general shout of laughter . " but it be time young chicken go to roost when they dare cackle against their elder . it be late , . " " , let us have another song . " " here be of will troll as good a stave as any man in the company . " " nay , we have one here who be second to none , " say , lay his hand upon big 's shoulder . " i have hear him on the cog with a voice like the wave upon the shore . i pray you , friend , to give us ' the of , ' or , if you will , ' the 's . ' " draw the back of his hand across his mouth , fix his eye upon the corner of the ceiling , and bellow forth , in a voice which make the torch flicker , the ballad for which he have be ask : -- - the franklin he have go to roam , the franklin 's maid she bide at home , but she be cold and coy and staid , and who may win the franklin 's maid ? there come a knight of high renown in bassinet and ; on knee full long he pray , he might not win the franklin 's maid . there come a squire so debonair his dress be rich , his word be fair , he sweetly sing , he deftly play : he could not win the franklin 's maid . there come a mercer with velvet cap and gaberdine ; for all his ship , for all his trade he could not buy the franklin 's maid . there come an arch bold and true , with bracer guard and stave of yew ; his purse be light , his jerkin fray ; , alas ! the franklin 's maid ! oh , some have laugh and some have cry and some have scour the ! but off they ride through wood and glade , the bowman and the franklin 's maid . a roar of delight from his audience , with stamp of foot and beating of blackjack against the ground , show how thoroughly the song be to their taste , while modestly retire into a quart pot , which he drain in four giant gulp . " i sing that ditty in ale-house ere i ever think to be an archer myself , " quoth he . " fill up your stoup ! " cry , thrust his own goblet into the open hogshead in front of him . " here be a last cup to the , and every brave boy who walk behind the rose of ! " " to the wood , the flax , and the gander 's wing ! " say an old archer on the right . " to a gentle loose , and the of for a mark at fourteen score ! " cry another . " to a bloody war ! " shout a fourth . " many to go and few to come ! " " with the most gold to the good steel ! " add a fifth . " and a last cup to the maid of our heart ! " cry . " a steady hand and a true eye , boy ; so let two quart be a bowman 's portion . " with shout and jest and snatch of song they stream from the room , and all be peaceful once more in the " . " so use be the good burgher of to martial display and knightly sport , that an ordinary joust or tournament be an everyday matter with them . the fame and brilliancy of the prince 's court have draw the knight-errant and from every part of . in the long list by the on the landward side of the northern gate there have be many a strange combat , when the teutonic knight , fresh from the conquest of the prussian heathen , run a course against the knight of , harden by continual struggle against the moor , or cavalier from break a lance with scandinavian warrior from the further shore of the great . here flutter many an outland pennon , bear symbol and blazonry from the bank of the , the wild of and the mountain stronghold of ; for chivalry be of no clime and of no race , nor be any land so wild that the fame and name of the prince have not sound through it from border to border . , however , be the excitement through town and district when it be learn that on the third in there would be hold a in which five knight of would hold the list against all comer . the great concourse of nobleman and famous soldier , the national character of the contest , and the fact that this be a last trial of arm before what promise to be an arduous and bloody war , all unite to make the event one of the most notable and brilliant that have ever see . on the eve of the contest the peasant flock in from the whole district of the , and the field beyond the wall be whiten with the tent of those who could find no warm lodging . from the distant camp of , too , and from , , , , , , , , and all the cluster of flourishing town which look upon as their mother , there throng an unceasing stream of horseman and of footman , all converge upon the great city . by the morning of the day on which the course be to be run , not less than eighty people have assemble round the list and along the low grassy ridge which look down upon the scene of the encounter . it be , as may well be imagine , no easy matter among so many note cavalier to choose out five on either side who should have precedence over their fellow . a score of secondary combat have nearly arise from the rivalry and bad blood create by the selection , and it be only the influence of the prince and the effort of the old baron which keep the peace among so many eager and fiery soldier . not till the day before the course be the shield finally hang out for the inspection of the lady and the herald , so that all man might know the name of the champion and have the opportunity to prefer any charge against them , should there be stain upon them which should disqualify them from take part in so noble and honorable a ceremony . and have not yet return from their raid into the march of the , so that the english party be deprive of two of their most famous lance . yet there remain so many good name that and , to whom the selection have be refer , have many an earnest consultation , in which every feat of arm and failure or success of each candidate be weigh and balance against the rival claim of his companion . of , the hero of , and of , who be hold to be the second lance in the army , be easily fix upon . then , of the young man , of , of , and of , be finally select to uphold the honor of . on the other side be the veteran and the brawny , with the free companion , the valiant of , and , of the teutonic order . the old soldier among the shake their head as they look upon the escutcheon of these famous warrior , for they be all man who have spend their life upon the saddle , and bravery and strength can avail little against experience and wisdom of war . " by my faith ! , " say the prince as he ride through the wind street on his way to the list , " i should have be glad to have splinter a lance . you have see me hold a spear since i have strength to lift one , and should know good whether i do not merit a place among this honorable company . " " there be no good seat and no true lance , sire , " say ; " but , if i may say so without fear of offence , it be not fitting that you should join in this debate . " " and why , ? " " because , sire , it be not for you to take part with against , or with against , see that you be lord of both . we be not too well love by the gascon now , and it be but the golden link of your princely coronet which hold us together . if that be snap i know not what would follow . " " snap , ! " cry the prince , with an angry sparkle in his dark eye . " what manner of talk be this ? you speak as though the allegiance of our people be a thing which might be throw off or on like a falcon 's . " " with a sorry hack one use whip and spur , sire , " say ; " but with a horse of blood and spirit a good cavalier be gentle and soothing , coax rather than force . these folk be strange people , and you must hold their love , even as you have it now , for you will get from their kindness what all the pennon in your army could not wring from them . " " you be , , " the prince answer . " we may keep such question for our council-chamber . but how now , my brother of , and of , what think you of this challenge ? " " i look to see some handsome joist , " say , who ride with the of upon the right of the prince , while be on the left . " by of ! but these burgher would bear some tax . see to the broadcloth and velvet that the rogue bear upon their back ! by my troth ! if they be my subject they would be glad enough to wear and leather ere i have do with them . but mayhap it be good to let the wool grow long ere you clip it . " " it be our pride , " the prince answer coldly , " that we rule over freeman and not slave . " " every man to his own humor , " say carelessly . " ! there be a sweet face at yonder window ! , i pray you to mark the house , and to have the maid bring to us at the abbey . " " , brother , nay ! " cry the prince impatiently . " i have have occasion to tell you more than once that thing be not order in this way in . " " a thousand pardon , dear friend , " the spaniard answer quickly , for a flush of anger have spring to the dark cheek of the english prince . " you make my exile so like a home that i forget at time that i be not in very truth back in . every land have indeed its way and manner ; but i promise you , , that when you be my guest in or you shall not yearn in vain for any commoner 's daughter on whom you may deign to cast your eye . " " your talk , sire , " say the prince still more coldly , " be not such as i love to hear from your lip . i have no taste for such amour as you speak of , and i have swear that my name shall be couple with that of no woman save my ever dear wife . " " ever the mirror of true chivalry ! " exclaim , while of , frighten at the stern countenance of their all-powerful protector , pluck hard at the mantle of his brother exile . " have a care , cousin , " he whisper ; " for the sake of the have a care , for you have anger him . " " ! fear not , " the other answer in the same low tone . " if i miss one stoop i will strike him on the next . mark me else . fair cousin , " he continue , turn to the prince , " these be rare man-at-arms and lusty bowman . it would be hard indeed to match them . " " they have journey far , sire , but they have never yet find their match . " " nor ever will , i doubt not . i feel myself to be back upon my throne when i look at them . but tell me , dear coz , what shall we do next , when we have drive this bastard from the kingdom which he have filch ? " " we shall then compel the of to place our good friend and brother of upon the throne . " " noble and generous prince ! " cry the little monarch . " that do , " say , glance out of the corner of his eye at the young conqueror , " we shall unite the force of , of , of and of . it would be shame to us if we do not do some great deed with such force ready to our hand . " " you say truly , brother , " cry the prince , his eye kindle at the thought . " methinks that we could not do anything more pleasing to our than to drive the heathen moor out of the country . " " i be with you , , as true as hilt to blade . but , by ! we shall not let these moor make mock at us from over the sea . we must take ship and thrust them from . " " by heaven , yes ! " cry the prince . " and it be the dream of my heart that our english pennon shall wave upon the of , and the lion and lily float over the holy city . " " and why not , dear coz ? your bowman have clear a path to , and why not to ? once there , your arm might rest . " " nay , there be more to be do , " cry the prince , carry away by the ambitious dream . " there be still the city of to be take , and war to be wage against the of . and beyond him again there be tribute to be levy from the of and from the kingdom of . ! , what say you ? can we not go as far eastward as of the ? " " will bide at home , sire , " say the rugged soldier . " by my soul ! as long as i be seneschal of i will find enough to do in guard the march which you have entrust to me . it would be a blithe day for the of when he hear that the sea lay between him and us . " " by my soul ! , " say the prince , " i have never know you turn laggard before . " " the babble hound , sire , be not always the first at the mort , " the old knight answer . " nay , my ! i have try you too often not to know . but , by my soul ! i have not see so dense a throng since the day that we bring down . " it be indeed an enormous crowd which cover the whole vast plain from the line of vineyard to the river bank . from the northern gate the prince and his companion look down at a dark sea of head , brighten here and there by the color hood of the woman , or by the sparkling of archer and man-at-arms . in the centre of this vast assemblage the list seem but a narrow strip of green mark out with banner and streamer , while a gleam of white with a flutter of pennon at either end show where the marquee be pitch which serve as the of the combatant . a path have be stake off from the city gate to the stand which have be erect for the court and the nobility . down this , amid the shout of the enormous multitude , the prince canter with his two attendant king , his high officer of state , and his long train of lord and lady , courtier , counsellor , and soldier , with toss of plume and flash of jewel , sheen of silk and glint of rich and gallant a show as heart could wish . the head of the cavalcade have reach the list ere the rear have come clear of the city gate , for the fair and the brave have assemble from all the broad land which be water by the dordogne and the . here ride cavalier from the sunny south , fiery soldier from , graceful courtier of or , and gallant young englishman from beyond the sea . here too be the beautiful brunette of the , with eye which their jewel , while beside them ride their blonde sister of , clear cut and aquiline , swathe in and in ermine , for the air be bite though the sun be bright . slowly the long and glitter train wound into the list , until every horse have be tether by the varlet in wait , and every lord and lady seat in the long stand which stretched , rich in tapestry and velvet and blazon arm , on either side of the centre of the arena . the holder of the list occupy the end which be nearest to the city gate . there , in front of their respective pavilion , fly the martlet of , the rose of , the scarlet bar of , the lion of the and the silver wing of the , each support by a squire clad in hang green stuff to represent so many , and bear a huge in their left hand . behind the tent the great war-horse , arm at all point , champ and rear , while their master sit at the door of their pavilion , with their helmet upon their knee , chat as to the order of the day 's doing . the english archer and man-at-arms have muster at that end of the list , but the vast majority of the spectator be in favor of the attack party , for the have decline in popularity ever since the bitter dispute as to the disposal of the royal captive after the battle of . hence the applause be by no mean general when the proclaim , after a flourish of trumpet , the name and style of the knight who be prepare , for the honor of their country and for the love of their lady , to hold the field against all who might do them the favor to run a course with them . on the other hand , a deafen burst of cheer greet the rival herald , who , advance from the other end of the list , roll forth the well-known title of the five famous warrior who have accept the defiance . " faith , , " say the prince , " it sound as though you be right . ! my grace , it seem that our friend on this side will not grieve if our english champion lose the day . " " it may be so , sire , " the gascon nobleman answer . " i have little doubt that in or at an english crowd would favor their own countryman . " " by my faith ! that be easily see , " say the prince , laugh , " for a few score english archer at yonder end be bellow as though they would the mighty multitude . i fear that they will have little to shout over this tourney , for my gold vase have small prospect of cross the water . what be the condition , ? " " they be to tilt singly not less than three course , sire , and the victory to rest with that party which shall have win the great number of course , each pair continue till one or other have the vantage . he who carry himself well of the victor have the prise , and he who be judge well of the other party have a jewel clasp . shall i order that the sound , sire ? " the prince nod , and the trumpet ring out , while the champion ride forth one after the other , each meeting his opponent in the centre of the list . go down before the practiced lance of the . win the vantage over the of , and the strike from the saddle . the burly , however , restore the hope of the attacker by beat to the ground of . so far , there be little to choose betwixt challenger and challenge . " by of ! " cry , with a tinge of color upon his pale cheek , " win who will , this have be a most notable contest . " " who come next for , ? " ask the prince in a voice which quiver with excitement . " of , sire . " " ! he be a man of good courage , and skilled in the use of all weapon . " " he be indeed , sire . but his eye , like my own , be the bad for war . yet he can tilt or play his part at as merrily as ever . it be he , sire , who win the golden crown which , your royal mother , give to be joust for by all the knight of after the harry of . i have hear that at there be a buffet which groan beneath the weight of his prise . " " i pray that my vase may join them , " say the prince . " but here be the cavalier of , and by my soul ! he look like a man of great valor and hardiness . let them run their full three course , for the issue be to hang upon one . " as the prince speak , amid a loud flourish of trumpet and the shouting of the gascon party , the last of the assailant ride gallantly into the list . he be a man of great size , clad in black armor without blazonry or ornament of any kind , for all worldly display be forbid by the rule of the military brotherhood to which he belong . no plume or flutter from his plain tilt salade , and even his lance be devoid of the customary banderole . a white mantle flutter behind him , upon the leave side of which be mark the broad black cross pick out with silver which be the well-known badge of the teutonic order . mount upon a horse as large , as black , and as forbid as himself , he canter slowly forward , with none of those and with which a cavalier be accustom to show his command over his charger . gravely and sternly he incline his head to the prince , and take his place at the further end of the arena . he have scarce do so before ride out from the holder ' enclosure , and gallop at full speed down the list , draw his charger up before the prince 's stand with a jerk which throw it back upon its haunch . with white armor , blazon shield , and plume of from his helmet , he carry himself in so jaunty and joyous a fashion , with toss pennon and curvet charger , that a shout of applause run the full circle of the arena . with the air of a man who haste to a joyous festival , he wave his lance in salute , and rein the paw horse round without permit its to touch the ground , he hasten back to his station . a great hush fall over the huge multitude as the two last champion face each other . a double issue seem to rest upon their contest , for their personal fame be at stake as well as their party 's honor . both be famous warrior , but as their exploit have be perform in widely sunder country , they have never before be able to cross lance . a course between such man would have be enough in itself to cause the keen interest , apart from its be the crisis which would decide who should be the victor of the day . for a moment they german sombre and collect , quiver in every fibre with eagerness and fiery resolution . then , amid a breath from the spectator , the glove fall from the marshal 's hand , and the two steel-clad horseman meet like a thunderclap in front of the royal stand . the german , though he reel for an instant before the thrust of the englishman , strike his opponent so fairly upon the vizor that the lace burst , the plume helmet fly to piece , and gallop on down the list with his bald head shimmer in the sunshine . a thousand wave scarves and toss cap announce that the first bout have fall to the popular party . the knight be not a man to be dishearten by a reverse . he spur back to the pavilion , and be out in a few instant with another helmet . the second course be so equal that the keen judge could not discern any vantage . each strike fire from the other 's shield , and each endure the jarring shock as though weld to the horse beneath him . in the final bout , however , strike his opponent with so true an aim that the point of the lance catch between the bar of his vizor and tear the front of his helmet out , while the german , aim somewhat low , and half stun by the shock , have the misfortune to strike his adversary upon the thigh , a breach of the rule of the , by which he not only sacrifice his chance of success , but would also have forfeit his horse and his armor , have the english knight choose to claim them . a roar of applause from the english soldier , with an ominous silence from the vast crowd who press round the barrier , announce that the balance of victory lie with the holder . already the ten champion have assemble in front of the prince to receive his award , when a harsh bugle call from the further end of the list draw all eye to a new and unexpected arrival . the list be , as have already be explain , situate upon the plain near the river upon those great occasion when the in front of the of 's be deem to be too small to contain the crowd . on the eastern side of this plain the slope upwards , thick with vine in summer , but now ridge with the brown bare enclosure . over the gently rise plain curve the white road which lead inland , usually fleck with traveller , but now with scarce a live form upon it , so completely have the list drain all the district of its inhabitant . strange it be to see such a vast concourse of people , and then to look upon that broad , white , empty highway which wind away , bleak and desert , until it narrow itself to a bare streak against the distant upland . shortly after the contest have begin , any one look from the list along this road might have remark , far away in the extreme distance , two brilliant and sparkling point which glitter and twinkle in the bright shimmer of the winter sun . within an hour these have become clear and near , until they might be see to come from the reflection from the of two horseman who be ride at the top of their speed in the direction of . another half-hour have bring them so close that every point of their bearing and equipment could be discern . the first be a knight in full armor , mount upon a brown horse with a white blaze upon breast and forehead . he be a short man of great breadth of shoulder , with vizor close , and no blazonry upon his simple white surcoat or plain black shield . the other , who be evidently his squire and attendant , be unarm save for the helmet upon his head , but bear in his right hand a very long and heavy oaken spear which belong to his master . in his left hand the squire hold not only the rein of his own horse but those of a great black war-horse , fully harness , which trot along at his side . thus the three horse and their two rider ride swiftly to the list , and it be the blare of the trumpet sound by the squire as his lord ride into the arena which have break in upon the and draw away the attention and interest of the spectator . " , ! " cry the prince , crane his neck , " who be this cavalier , and what be it that he desire ? " " on my word , sire , " reply , with the utmost surprise upon his face , " it be my opinion that he be a frenchman . " " a frenchman ! " repeat . " and how can you tell that , my , when he have neither , crest , or blazonry ? " " by his armor , sire , which be round at elbow and at shoulder than any of or of . italian he might be be his bassinet more slope , but i will swear that those plate be weld betwixt this and . here come his squire , however , and we shall hear what strange fortune have bring him over the march . " as he speak the attendant canter up the grassy enclosure , and pull up his steed in front of the royal stand , blow a second fanfare upon his bugle . he be a raw-boned , man , with black bristle beard and a swagger bearing . have sound his call , he thrust the bugle into his belt , and , push his way betwixt the group of and of gascon knight , he rein up within a spear 's length of the royal party . " i come , " he shout in a hoarse , thick voice , with a strong breton accent , " as squire and herald from my master , who be a very valiant , and a liegeman to the great and powerful monarch , , king of the french . my master have hear that there be joust here , and prospect of honorable advancement , so he have come to ask that some english cavalier will vouchsafe for the love of his lady to run a course with sharpen lance with him , or to meet him with sword , mace , battle-axe , or dagger . he bid me say , however , that he would fight only with a true englishman , and not with any mongrel who be neither english nor french , but speak with the tongue of the one , and fight under the banner of the other . " " ! " cry , with a voice of thunder , while his countryman clap their hand to their sword . the squire , however , take no notice of their angry face , but continue with his master 's message . " he be now ready , sire , " he say , " albeit his destrier have travel many mile this day , and fast , for we be in fear lest we come too late for the joust . " " have indeed come too late , " say the prince , " see that the prise be about to be award ; yet i doubt not that one of these gentleman will run a course for the sake of honor with this cavalier of . " " and as to the prise , sire , " quoth , " i be sure that i speak for all when i say this french knight have our leave to bear it away with him if he can fairly win it . " " bear word of this to your master , " say the prince , " and ask him which of these five englishman he would desire to meet . but stay ; your master bear no , and we have not yet hear his name . " " my master , sire , be under vow to the neither to reveal his name nor to open his vizor until he be back upon french ground once more . " " yet what assurance have we , " say the prince , " that this be not some varlet masquerade in his master 's harness , or some caitiff knight , the very touch of whose lance might bring infamy upon an honorable gentleman ? " " it be not so , sire , " cry the squire earnestly . " there be no man upon earth who would demean himself by break a lance with my master . " " you speak out boldly , squire , " the prince answer ; " but unless i have some further assurance of your master 's noble birth and gentle name i can match the choicest lance of my court against him . " " you refuse , sire ? " " i do refuse . " " then , sire , i be bid to ask you from my master whether you would consent if , upon hear my master 's name , should assure you that he be indeed a man with whom you might yourself cross sword without indignity . " " i ask no good , " say the prince . " then i must ask , , that you will step forth . i have your pledge that the name shall remain ever a secret , and that you will neither say nor write one word which might betray it . the name be -- -- -- " he stoop down from his horse and whisper something into the old knight 's ear which make him start with surprise , and stare with much curiosity at the distant , who be sit his charger at the further end of the arena . " be this indeed sooth ? " he exclaim . " it be , my lord , and i swear it by of . " " i might have know it , " say , twist his moustache , and still look thoughtfully at the cavalier . " what then , ? " ask the prince . " sire , this be a knight whom it be indeed great honor to meet , and i would that your grace would grant me leave to send my squire for my harness , for i would dearly love to run a course with him . " " , nay , , you have gain as much honor as one man can bear , and it be hard if you could not rest now . but i pray you , squire , to tell your master that he be very welcome to our court , and that wine and spice will be serve him , if he would refresh himself before joust . " " my master will not drink , " say the squire . " let him then name the gentleman with whom he would break a spear . " " he would contend with these five knight , each to choose such weapon as suit him well . " " i perceive , " say the prince , " that your master be a man of great heart and high of enterprise . but the sun already be low in the west , and there will scarce be light for these course . i pray you , gentleman , to take your place , that we may see whether this stranger 's deed be as bold as his word . " the unknown knight have sit like a statue of steel , look neither to the right nor to the left during these preliminaries . he have change from the horse upon which he have ride , and bestride the black charger which his squire have lead beside him . his immense breadth , his stern compose appearance , and the mode in which he handle his shield and his lance , be enough in themselves to convince the thousand of critical spectator that he be a dangerous opponent . , who stand in the front row of the archer with , big , and other of the company , have be criticise the proceeding from the commencement with the ease and freedom of a man who have spend his life under arm and have learn in a hard school to know at a glance the point of a horse and his rider . he stare now at the stranger with a wrinkle brow and the air of a man who be strive to stir his memory . " by my hilt ! i have see the thick body of him before . yet i can call to mind where it could have be . at belike , or be it at ? mark me , lad , this man will prove to be one of the good lance of , and there be no well in the world . " " it be but child 's play , this poke game , " say . " i would fain try my hand at it , for , by the black rood ! i think that it might be amend . " " what then would you do , ? " ask several . " there be many thing which might be do , " say the forester thoughtfully . " methinks that i would begin by break my spear . " " so they all strive to do . " " , but not upon another man 's shield . i would break it over my own knee . " " and what the good for that , old beef and bone ? " ask . " so i would turn what be but a lady 's bodkin of a weapon into a very handsome club . " " and then , ? " " then i would take the other 's spear into my arm or my leg , or where it please him well to put it , and i would dash out his brain with my club . " " by my ten ! old , " say , " i would give my feather-bed to see you at a . this be a most courtly and gentle sport which you have devise . " " so it seem to me , " say seriously . " or , again , one might seize the other round the middle , pluck him off his horse and bear him to the pavilion , there to hold him to ransom . " " good ! " cry , amid a roar of laughter from all the archer round . " by of ! we shall make a of , and thou shalt draw up rule for our joust . but , , who be it that you would uphold in this knightly and pleasing fashion ? " " what mean you ? " " why , , so strong and strange a tilter must fight for the brightness of his lady 's eye or the curve of her eyelash , even as do for the . " " i know not about that , " say the big archer , scratch his head in perplexity . " since have play me false , i can scarce fight for her . " " yet any woman will serve . " " there be my mother then , " say . " she be at much pain at my upbringing , and , by my soul ! i will uphold the curve of her eyelash , for it my very to think of her . but who be here ? " " it be . he be a valiant man , but i fear that he be scarce firm enough upon the saddle to bear the thrust of such a tilter as this stranger promise to be . " 's word be speedily justify , for even as he speak the two knight meet in the centre of the list . strike his opponent a shrewd blow upon the helmet , but be meet with so frightful a thrust that he whirl out of his saddle and roll over and over upon the ground . meet with little good success , for his shield be split , his vambrace tear and he himself wound slightly in the side . and the unknown knight strike each other fairly upon the helmet ; but , while the stranger sit as firm and rigid as ever upon his charger , the englishman be bend back to his horse 's cropper by the weight of the blow , and have gallop half-way down the list ere he could recover himself . be beat to the ground with a be the weapon which he have have to be carry to his pavilion . these rapid success , gain one after the other over four celebrated warrior , work the crowd up to a pitch of wonder and admiration . thunder of applause from the english soldier , as well as from the citizen and peasant , show how far the love of brave and knightly deed could rise above the rivalry of race . " by my soul ! , " cry the prince , with his cheek flush and his eye shine , " this be a man of good courage and great hardiness . i could not have think that there be any single arm upon earth which could have overthrow these four champion . " " he be indeed , as i have say , sire , a knight from whom much honor be to be gain . but the low edge of the sun be wet , and it will be beneath the sea ere long . " " here be , on foot and with his sword , " say the prince . " i have hear that he be a fine swordsman . " " the fine in your army , sire , " answer . " yet i doubt not that he will need all his skill this day . " as he speak , the two combatant advance from either end in full armor with their two-handed sword slope over their shoulder . the stranger walk heavily and with a measure stride , while the english knight advance as briskly as though there be no iron shell to weigh down the freedom of his limb . at four pace distance they stop , eye each other for a moment , and then in an instant fall to work with a clatter and clang as though two sturdy smith be busy upon their anvil . up and down go the long , shine blade , round and round they circle in curve of glimmer light , cross , meeting , disengage , with flash of spark at every parry . here and there bound , his head erect , his jaunty plume flutter in the air , while his dark opponent send in crash blow upon blow , follow fiercely up with cut and with thrust , but never once get past the practise blade of the skilled swordsman . the crowd roar with delight as would stoop his head to avoid a blow , or by some slight movement of his body allow some terrible thrust to glance harmlessly past him . suddenly , however , his time come . the frenchman , whirl up his sword , show for an instant a chink betwixt his shoulder piece and the which guard his upper arm . in dash , and out again so swiftly that the eye could not follow the quick play of his blade , but a trickle of blood from the stranger 's shoulder , and a rapidly widen red smudge upon his white surcoat , show where the thrust have take effect . the wound be , however , but a slight one , and the frenchman be about to renew his onset , when , at a sign from the prince , throw down his baton , and the marshal of the list strike up the weapon and bring the contest to an end . " it be time to check it , " say the prince , smile , " for be too good a man for me to lose , and , by the five holy wound ! if one of those cut come home i should have fear for our champion . what think you , ? " " i think , , that the little man be very well able to take care of himself . for my part , i should wish to see so well match a pair fight on while a drop of blood remain in their vein . " " we must have speech with him . such a man must not go from my court without rest or sup . bring him hither , , and , certes , if the have resign his claim upon this goblet , it be right and proper that this cavalier should carry it to with him as a sign of the prowess that he have show this day . " as he speak , the knight-errant , who have remount his warhorse , gallop forward to the royal stand , with a silken kerchief bind round his wounded arm . the setting sun cast a ruddy glare upon his burnish arm , and send his long black shadow stream behind him up the level clearing . pull up his steed , he slightly incline his head , and sit in the stern and compose fashion with which he have bear himself throughout , heedless of the applaud shout and the flutter of kerchief from the long line of brave man and of fair woman who be look down upon him . " knight , " say the prince , " we have all marvel this day at this great skill and valor with which have be please to endow you . i would fain that you should tarry at our court , for a time at least , until your hurt be heal and your horse rest . " " my hurt be nothing , sire , nor be my horse weary , " return the stranger in a deep , stern voice . " will you not at least hie back to with us , that you may drain a cup of muscadine and sup at our table ? " " i will neither drink your wine nor sit at your table , " return the other . " i bear no love for you or for your race , and there be nought that i wish at your hand until the day when i see the last sail which bear you back to your island vanish away against the western sky . " " these be bitter word , sir knight , " say , with an angry frown . " and they come from a bitter heart , " answer the unknown knight . " how long be it since there have be peace in my hapless country ? where be the , and orchard , and vineyard , which make fair ? where be the city which make her great ? from to we be beset by every prowl hireling in , who rend and tear the country which you have leave too weak to guard her own march . be it not a that a man may ride all day in that unhappy land without see thatch upon roof or hear the crow of cock ? do not one fair kingdom content you , that you should strive so for this other one which have no love for you ? ! a true frenchman 's word may well be bitter , for bitter be his lot and bitter his thought as he ride through his thrice unhappy country . " " knight , " say the prince , " you speak like a brave man , and our cousin of be happy in have a cavalier who be so fit to uphold his cause either with tongue or with sword . but if you think such evil of us , how come it that you have trust to us without warranty or safe-conduct ? " " because i know that you would be here , sire . have the man who sit upon your right be ruler of this land , i have indeed think twice before i look to him for aught that be knightly or generous . " with a soldierly salute , he wheel round his horse , and , gallop down the list , disappear amid the dense crowd of footman and of horseman who be stream away from the scene of the tournament . " the insolent villain ! " cry , glare furiously after him . " i have see a man 's tongue tear from his jaw for less . would it not be well even now , , to send horseman to hale him back ? bethink you that it may be one of the royal house of , or at least some knight whose loss would be a heavy blow to his master . , you be well mount , gallop after the caitiff , i pray you . " " do so , , " say the prince , " and give him this purse of a hundred noble as a sign of the respect which i bear for him ; for , by ! he have serve his master this day even as i would wish liegeman of mine to serve me . " so say , the prince turn his back upon the of , and spring upon his horse , ride slowly homewards to the of 's . on the morning after the joust , when go , as be his custom , into his master 's chamber to wait upon him in his dressing and to curl his hair , he find him already up and very busily at work . he sit at a table by the window , a on one side of him and a lurcher on the other , his foot tuck away under the trestle on which he sit , and his tongue in his cheek , with the air of a man who be much perplex . a sheet of vellum lay upon the board in front of him , and he hold a pen in his hand , with which he have be scribble in a rude schoolboy hand . so many be the blot , however , and so numerous the scratch and erasure , that he have at last give it up in despair , and sit with his single uncovered eye cock upwards at the ceiling , as one who wait upon inspiration . " by ! " he cry , as enter , " you be the man who will stand by me in this matter . i have be in sore need of you , . " " god be with you , my fair lord ! " the squire answer . " i trust that you have take no hurt from all that you have go through yesterday . " " ; i feel the fresher for it , . it have ease my joint , which be somewhat stiff from these year of peace . i trust , , that thou very carefully note and mark the bearing and carriage of this knight of ; for it be time , now when you be young , that you should see all that be good , and mould your own action in accordance . this be a man from whom much honor might be gain , and i have seldom meet any one for whom i have conceive so much love and esteem . could i but learn his name , i should send you to him with my cartel , that we might have further occasion to watch his goodly feat of arm . " " it be say , my fair lord , that none know his name save only the , and that he be under vow not to speak it . so run the gossip at the squire ' table . " " be he who he might , he be a very hardy gentleman . but i have a task here , , which be hard to me than aught that be set before me yesterday . " " can i help you , my lord ? " " that indeed you can . i have be write my greeting to my sweet wife ; for i hear that a messenger go from the prince to within the week , and he would gladly take a packet for me . i pray you , , to cast your eye upon what i have write , and see it they be such word as my lady will understand . my finger , as you can see , be more use to iron and leather than to the drawing of stroke and turn of letter . what then ? be there aught amiss , that you should stare so ? " " it be this first word , my lord . in what tongue be you please to write ? " " in ; for my lady talk it more than she do french . " yet this be no english word , my sweet lord . here be four t be and never a letter betwixt them . " " by ! it seem strange to my eye when i write it , " say . " they bristle up together like a clump of lance . we must break their rank and set them farther apart . the word be ' that . ' now i will read it to you , , and you shall write it out fair ; for we leave bordeaux this day , and it would be great joy to me to think that the have word from me . " sit down as order , with a pen in his hand and a fresh sheet of parchment before him , while slowly spell out his letter , run his forefinger on from word to word . " that my heart be with , my dear sweeting , be what thine own heart will assure of . all be well with us here , save that have the mange on his back , and have scarce yet get clear of his stiffness from be four day on , and the more so because the sea be very high , and we be like to founder on account of a hole in her side , which be make by a stone cast at us by certain sea-rover , who may the saint have in their keeping , for they have go from amongst us , as have young , and mariner and archer , who would be the more welcome here as there be like to be a very fine war , with much honor and all hope of advancement , for which i go to gather my company together , who be now at , where they pillage and destroy ; yet i hope that , by 's help , i may be able to show that i be their master , even as , my sweet lady , i be servant . " " how of that , ? " continue , blink at his squire , with an expression of some pride upon his face . " have i not tell her all that have befall us ? " " you have say much , my fair lord ; and yet , if i may say so , it be somewhat crowd together , so that my can , mayhap , scarce follow it . be it in short period -- -- -- " " , it boot me not how you marshal them , as long as they be all there at the muster . let my lady have the word , and she will place them in such order as please her good . but i would have you add what it would please her to know . " " that will i , " say , blithely , and bend to the task . " my fair lady and mistress , " he write , " have have us in his keeping , and my lord be well and in good cheer . he have win much honor at the joust before the prince , when he alone be able to make it good against a very valiant man from . touch the money , there be enough and to spare until we reach . herewith , my fair lady , i send my humble regard , entreat you that you will give the same to your daughter , the . may the holy saint have you both in their keeping be ever the prayer of servant , " . " " that be very fairly set forth , " say , nod his bald head as each sentence be read to him . " and for , , if there be any dear friend to whom you would fain give greet , i can send it for within this packet . " " there be none , " say , sadly . " have you no kinsfolk , then ? " " none , save my brother . " " ! i have forget that there be ill blood betwixt you . but be there none in all who love ? " " none that i dare say so . " " and none whom you love ? " " nay , i will not say that , " say . shake his head and laugh softly to himself , " i see how it be with you , " he say . " have i not note your frequent sigh and vacant eye ? be she fair ? " " she be indeed , " cry from his heart , all tingle at this sudden turn of the talk . " and good ? " " as an angel . " " and yet she love you not ? " " nay , i can say that she love another . " " then you have hope ? " " i could not live else . " " then must you strive to be worthy of her love . be brave and pure , fearless to the strong and humble to the weak ; and so , whether this love prosper or no , you will have fit yourself to be honor by a maiden 's love , which be , in sooth , the high guerdon which a true knight can hope for . " " indeed , my lord , i do so strive , " say ; " but she be so sweet , so dainty , and of so noble a spirit , that i fear me that i shall never be worthy of her . " " by think so you become worthy . be she then of noble birth ? " " she be , my lord , " falter . " of a knightly house ? " " yes . " " have a care , , have a care ! " say , kindly . " the high the steed the great the fall . hawk not at that which may be beyond flight . " " my lord , i know little of the way and usage of the world , " cry , " but i would fain ask your rede upon the matter . you have know my father and my kin : be not my family one of good standing and repute ? " " beyond all question . " " and yet you warn me that i must not place my love too high . " " be yours , , then , by ! i can think that any family in the land would not be proud to take you among them , see that you come of so old a strain . but while the , by my soul ! if this be not 's step i be the more mistaken . " as he speak , a heavy footfall be hear without , and the portly knight fling open the door and stride into the room . " why , my little coz , " say he , " i have come across to tell you that i live above the barber be in the , and that there be a venison pasty in the oven and two flask of the right vintage on the table . by ! a blind man might find the place , for one have but to get in the wind from it , and follow the savory smell . put on your cloak , then , and come , for and , with one or two other , be await us . " " , , i can be with you , for i must to this day . " " to ? but i have hear that your company be to come with my forty rascal to . " " if you will take charge of them , . for i will go to with none save my two squire and two archer . then , when i have find the rest of my company i shall lead them to . we set forth this morning . " " then i must back to my pasty , " say . " you will find us at , i doubt not , unless the prince throw me into prison , for he be very wroth against me . " " and why , ? " " ! because i have send my cartel , gauntlet , and defiance to and to . " " to ? in 's name , , why have you do this ? " " because he and the other have use me despitefully . " " and how ? " " because they have pass me over in choose those who should joust for . yourself and i could pass , coz , for you be mature man ; but who be , and , and ? by my soul ! i be prod for my food into a when they be howl for their pap . be a man of my weight and substance to be throw aside for the first three lad who have learn the trick of the tilt-yard ? but hark , coz , i think of send my cartel also to the prince . " " ! ! you be mad ! " " not i , ' faith ! i care not a denier whether he be prince or no . by ! i see that your squire 's eye be start from his head like a truss crab . well , friend , we be all three man of , and not lightly to be jeer at . " " have he jeer at you than ? " " ! yes , ' 's heart be still stout , ' say one of his court . ' have it be out of keep with the rest of him , ' quoth the prince . ' and his arm be strong , ' say another . ' so be the backbone of his horse , ' quoth the prince . this very day i will send him my cartel and defiance . " " , nay , my dear , " say , lay his hand upon his angry friend 's arm . " there be naught in this , for it be but say that you be a strong and robust man , who have need of a good destrier . and as to and , bethink you that if when you yourself be young the old lance have ever be preferred , how would you then have have the chance to earn the good name and fame which you now bear ? you do not ride as light as you do , , and i ride light by the weight of my hair , but it would be an ill thing if in the evening of our life we show that our heart be less true and loyal than of old . if such a knight as may turn against his own prince for the sake of a light word , then where be we to look for steadfast faith and constancy ? " " ah ! my dear little coz , it be easy to sit in the sunshine and preach to the man in the shadow . yet you could ever win me over to your side with that soft voice of yours . let us think no more of it then . but , holy ! i have forget the pasty , and it will be as scorch as ! come , , lest the foul fiend get the good of me again . " " for one hour , then ; for we march at . , , that he be to come with me to , and to choose one archer for his comrade . the rest will to when the prince start , which will be before the feast of the . have ready at with my sycamore lance , and place my harness on the sumpter mule . " with these brief direction , the two old soldier stride off together , while hasten to get all in order for their journey . it be a bright , crisp winter 's day when the little party set off from on their journey to , where the missing half of their company have last be hear of . and have ride on in advance , the knight upon his hackney , while his great war-horse trot beside his squire . two hour later follow ; for he have the tavern reckoning to settle , and many other duty which fall to him as squire of the body . with him come and , arm as of old , but mount for their journey upon a pair of clumsy horse , and shamble , but of great endurance , and capable of jog along all day , even when between the knee of the huge archer , who turn the scale at two hundred and seventy pound . they take with them the sumpter mule , which carry in pannier the wardrobe and table furniture of ; for the knight , though neither fop nor epicure , be very dainty in small matter , and love , however bare the board or hard the life , that his napery should still be white and his spoon of silver . there have be frost during the night , and the white hard road ring loud under their horse ' iron as they spur through the east gate of the town , along the same broad highway which the unknown french champion have traverse on the day of the joust . the three ride abreast , with his eye cast down and his mind distrait , for his thought be busy with the conversation which he have have with in the morning . have he do well to say so much , or have he not do good to have say more ? what would the knight have say have he confess to his love for the ? would he cast him off in disgrace , or might he chide him as have abuse the shelter of his roof ? it have be ready upon his tongue to tell him all when have break in upon them . perchance , with his love of all the die usage of chivalry , might have contrive some strange ordeal or feat of arm by which his love should be put to the test . smile as he wonder what fantastic and wondrous deed would be exact from him . whatever it be , he be ready for it , whether it be to hold the list in the court of the of , to carry a cartel to the of , or to serve a term against the wild heathen of . have say that his birth be high enough for any lady , if his fortune could but be amend . often have curl his lip at the beggarly craving for land or for gold which blind man to the high and more lasting issue of life . now it seem as though it be only by this same land and gold that he might hope to reach his heart 's desire . but then , again , the of be no friend to the of . it might happen that , should he amass rich by some happy fortune of war , this feud might hold the two family aloof . even if love him , he know her too well to think that she would wed him without the blessing of her father . dark and murky be it all , but hope mount high in youth , and it ever flutter over all the turmoil of his thought like a white plume amid the shock of horseman . if have enough to ponder over as he ride through the bare plain of , his two companion be more busy with the present and less thoughtful of the future . ride for half a mile with his chin upon his shoulder , look back at a white kerchief which flutter out of the gable window of a high house which peep over the corner of the battlement . when at last a dip of the road hide it from his view , he cock his steel cap , shrug his broad shoulder , and ride on with laughter in his eye , and his weather-beaten face all with pleasant memory . also ride in silence , but his eye wander slowly from one side of the road to the other , and he stare and ponder and nod his head like a traveller who make his note and save them up for the . " by the rood ! " he break out suddenly , slap his thigh with his great red hand , " i know that there be something , but i could not bring to my mind what it be . " " what be it then ? " ask , come with a start out of his reverie . " why , it be the hedgerow , " roar , with a shout of laughter . " the country be all scrape as clear as a friar 's poll . but indeed i can think much of the folk in these part . why do they not get to work and dig up these long row of black and crooked stump which i see on every hand ? a franklin of would think shame to have such litter upon his soil . " " thou foolish old ! " quoth . " you should know well , since i have hear that the monk of could squeeze a good cup of wine from their own grape . know then that if these row be dug up the wealth of the country would be go , and mayhap there would be dry throat and gape mouth in , for in three month ' time these black root will blossom and shoot and burgeon , and from them will come many a good of and which will cross the narrow sea . but see the church in the hollow , and the folk who cluster in the churchyard ! by my hilt ! it be a burial , and there be a pass bell ! " he pull off his steel cap as he speak and cross himself , with a mutter prayer for the repose of the dead . " there too , " remark , as they ride on again , " that which seem to the eye to be dead be still full of the sap of life , even as the vine be . thus have write and his law very broadly on all that be around us , if our poor dull eye and dull soul could but read what he have set before us . " " ! petit , " cry the bowman , " you take me back to the day when you be new fledge , as sweet a little chick as ever peck his way out of a monkish egg . i have fear that in gain our debonair young man-at-arms we have lose our soft-spoken clerk . in truth , i have note much change in you since we come from . " " surely it would be strange else , see that i have live in a world so new to me . yet i trust that there be many thing in which i have not change . if i have turn to serve an earthly master , and to carry arm for an earthly king , it would be an ill thing if i be to lose all thought of the great high and of all , whose humble and unworthy servant i be ere ever i leave . you , , be also from the cloister , but i trow that you do not feel that you have desert the old service in take on the new . " " i be a slow-witted man , " say , " and , in sooth , when i try to think about such matter it cast a gloom upon me . yet i do not look upon myself as a bad man in an archer 's jerkin than i be in a white cowl , if that be what you mean . " " you have but change from one white company to the other , " quoth . " but , by these ten ! it be a pass strange thing to me to think that it be but in the last fall of the leaf that we walk from together , he so gentle and maidenly , and you , , like a great overgrow ; and now here you be as a squire and as lusty an archer as ever pass down the highway from , while i be still the same old , with never a change , save that i have a few more sin on my soul and a few less crown in my pouch . but i have never yet hear , , what the reason be why you should come out of . " " there be seven reason , " say thoughtfully . " the first of them be that they throw me out . " " ! , to the devil with the other six ! that be enough for me and for also . i can see that they be very wise and discreet folk at . ah ! , what have you in the pipkin ? " " it be milk , worthy sir , " answer the , who stand by the door of a cottage with a jug in her hand . " would it please you , gentle , that i should bring you out three horn of it ? " " , ma petite , but here be a piece for kindly tongue and for the sight of pretty face . ! but she have a bonne mine . i have a mind to bide and speak with her . " " , nay , , " cry . " will await us , and he in haste . " " true , true , ! adieu , ma ! a . her mother be a woman also . see where she dig by the wayside . ! the ripe fruit be ever the sweet . jour , ma belle dame ! have you in his keep ! say where he would await us ? " " at or . he say that we could not pass him , see that there be but the one road . " " , and it be a road that i know as i know the parish butt , " quoth the bowman . " thirty time have i journey it , forward and backward , and , by the twang of string ! i be wont to come back this way more laden than i go . i have carry all that i have into in a wallet , and it have take four to carry it back again . 's benison on the man who first turn his hand to the making of war ! but there , down in the dingle , be the church of , and you may see the inn where three poplar grow beyond the village . let us on , for a stoup of wine would hearten us upon our way . " the highway have lie through the swell vineyard country , which stretch away to the north and east in gentle curve , with many a peep spire and feudal tower , and cluster of village house , all clear cut and hard in the bright wintry air . to their right stretch the blue , run swiftly seawards , with boat and barge dot over its broad bosom . on the other side lie a strip of vineyard , and beyond it the desolate and sandy region of the , all tangle with fade gorse and heath and broom , stretch away in unbroken gloom to the blue hill which lay low upon the furthest . behind them might still be see the broad estuary of the , with the high tower of and shoot up from the plain . in front , amid radiate line of poplar , lie the riverside of wall , white house , and a feather of blue smoke . " this be ' , ' " say , as they pull up their horse at a whitewash straggle hostel . " what there ! " he continue , beat upon the door with the hilt of his sword . " tapster , ostler , varlet , hark hither , and a on your lazy limb ! ! , as red in the nose as ever ! three jack of the wine of the country , the air bite shrewdly . i pray you , , to take note of this door , for i have a tale concern it . " " tell me , friend , " say to the portly red-faced inn-keeper , " have a knight and a squire pass this way within the hour ? " " , sir , it would be two hour back . be he a small man , weak in the eye , with a want of hair , and speak very quiet when he be most to be fear ? " " the same , " the squire answer . " but i marvel how you should know how he speak when he be in wrath , for he be very with those who be beneath him . " " praise to the saint ! it be not i who anger him , " say the fat . " who , then ? " " it be young of , who chance to be here , and make game of the englishman , see that he be but a small man and have a face which be full of peace . but indeed this good knight be a very quiet and patient man , for he see that the be still young and speak from an empty head , so he sit his horse and quaff his wine , even as you be do now , all heedless of the clack tongue . " " and what then , ? " " well , monsieur , it chance that the , have say this and that , for the laughter of the varlet , cry out at last about the glove that the knight wear in his coif , ask if it be the custom in for a man to wear a great archer 's glove in his ! i have never see a man get off his horse as quick as do that stranger englishman . ere the word be past the other 's lip he be beside him , his face nigh touching , and his breath hot upon his cheek . ' i think , young sir , ' quoth he softly , look into the other 's eye , ' that now that i be near you will very clearly see that the glove be not an archer 's glove . ' ' not , ' say the with a twitch lip . ' nor be it large , but very small , ' quoth the englishman . ' less large than i have think , ' say the other , look down , for the knight 's gaze be heavy upon his eyelid . ' and in every way such a glove as might be wear by the fair and sweet lady in , ' quoth the englishman . ' it may be so , ' say the , turn his face from him . ' i be myself weak in the eye , and have often take one thing for another , ' quoth the knight , as he spring back into his saddle and ride off , leave the bite his nail before the door . ! by the five wound , many man of war have drink my wine , but never one be more to my fancy than this little englishman . " " by my hilt ! he be our master , , " quoth , " and such man as we do not serve under a . but here be four denier , , and be with you ! en avant , ! for we have a long road before us . " at a brisk trot the three friend leave and its behind them , ride without a halt past , and on by ferry over the river . at the further side the road wind through , , and , with the sunlit river still gleam upon the right , and the bare poplar bristle up upon either side . and ride silent on either side , but every inn , , or castle bring back to some remembrance of love , foray , or plunder , with which to beguile the way . " there be the smoke from , on the further side of , " quoth he . " there be three sister yonder , the daughter of a farrier , and , by these ten ! a man might ride for a long day and never set eye upon such maiden . there be , tall and grave , and petite and gay , and the dark , with eye that go through you like a wax arrow . i linger there as long as four day , and be betroth to them all ; for it seem shame to set one above her sister , and might make ill blood in the family . yet , for all my care , thing be not merry in the house , and i think it well to come away . there , too , be the mill of . , who own it , be a right good comrade , and have ever a seat and a crust for a weary archer . he be a man who wrought hard at all that he turn his hand to ; but he heat himself in grind bone to mix with his flour , and so through he bring a fever upon himself and die . " " tell me , , " say , " what be amiss with the door of yonder inn that you should ask me to observe it . " " ! yes , i have well-nigh forget . what see you on yonder door ? " " i see a square hole , through which doubtless the host may peep when he be not too sure of those who knock . " " and see you naught else ? " " i mark that beneath this hole there be a deep cut in the door , as though a great nail have be drive in . " " and naught else ? " " no. " " have you look more closely you might have see that there be a stain upon the wood . the first time that i ever hear my comrade laugh be in front of that door . i hear him once again when he slay a french squire with his tooth , he be unarm and the frenchman have a dagger . " " and why do laugh in front of the ! " ask . " be a hard and perilous man when he have the bitter drop in him ; and , by my hilt ! he be bear for war , for there be little sweetness or rest in him . this inn , ' , ' be keep in the old day by one , who have a hard fist and a hard heart . it be say that many and many an archer come from the war have be serve with wine with simple in it , until he sleep , and have then be strip of all by this . then on the morrow , if he make complaint , this wicked would throw him out upon the road or beat him , for he be a very lusty man , and have many stout varlet in his service . this chance to come to 's ear when we be at together , and he would have it that we should ride to with a good hempen cord , and give this such a scourge as he merit . forth we ride then , but when we come to ' , ' have have word of our come and its purpose , so that the door be bar , nor be there any way into the house . ' let us in , good ! ' cry , ' let us in , good ! ' cry i , but no word could we get through the hole in the door , save that he would draw an arrow upon us unless we go on our way . ' well , , ' quoth at last , ' this be but a sorry welcome , see that we have ride so far just to shake you by the hand . ' ' shake me by the hand without come in , ' say . ' and how that ? ' ask . ' by pass in your hand through the hole , ' say he . ' , my hand be wound , ' quoth , ' and of such a size that i can pass it in . ' ' that need not hinder , ' say , who be hot to be rid of us , ' pass in your left hand . ' ' but i have something for , , ' say . ' what then ? ' he ask . ' there be an english archer who sleep here last week of the name of of . ' ' we have have many rogue here , ' say . ' his conscience have be heavy within him because he owe you a debt of fourteen denier , have drink wine for which he have never pay . for the easing of his soul , he ask me to pay the money to you as i pass . ' now this be very greedy for money , so he thrust forth his hand for the fourteen denier , but have his dagger ready and he pin his hand to the door . ' i have pay the englishman 's debt , ! ' quoth he , and so ride away , laugh so that he could scarce sit his horse , leave mine host still nail to his door . such be the story of the hole which you have mark , and of the smudge upon the wood . i have hear that from that time english archer have be well treat in the auberge of . but what have we here by the wayside ? " " it appear to be a very holy man , " say . " and , by the rood ! he have some strange ware , " cry . " what be these bit of stone , and of wood , and rust nail , which be set out in front of him ? " the man whom they have remark sit with his back against a cherry-tree , and his leg shoot out in front of him , like one who be greatly at his ease . across his thigh be a wooden board , and scatter over it all manner of slip of wood and knob of brick and stone , each lay separate from the other , as a huckster place his ware . he be dress in a long gray gown , and wear a broad hat of the same color , much , with three scallop-shell dangle from the brim . as they approach , the traveller observe that he be advance in year , and that his eye be upturn and yellow . " dear knight and gentleman , " he cry in a high crackling voice , " worthy christian cavalier , will ride past and leave an age pilgrim to die of hunger ? the sight be burn from mine eye by the sand of the , and i have have neither crust of bread nor cup of wine these two day past . " " by my hilt ! father , " say , look keenly at him , " it be a marvel to me that girdle should have so goodly a span and clip so closely , if you have in sooth have so little to place within it . " " kind stranger , " answer the pilgrim , " you have unwittingly speak word which be very grievous to me to listen to . yet i should be loth to blame you , for i doubt not that what you say be not mean to sadden me , nor to bring my sore affliction back to my mind . it ill become me to prate too much of what i have endure for the faith , and yet , since you have observe it , i must tell you that this thickness and roundness of the waist be cause by a dropsy bring on by in journey from the house of to the of . " " there , , " say , with a redden cheek , " let that curb your blunt tongue . how could you bring a fresh pang to this holy man , who have endure so much and have journey as far as 's own blessed tomb ? " " may the foul fiend strike me dumb ! " cry the bowman in hot repentance ; but both the palmer and throw up their hand to stop him . " i forgive from my heart , dear brother , " pipe the blind man . " but , oh , these wild word of thine be bad to mine ear than aught which you could say of me . " " not another word shall i speak , " say ; " but here be a franc for and i crave blessing . " " and here be another , " say . " and another , " cry . but the blind palmer would have none of their alms . " foolish , foolish pride ! " he cry , beat upon his chest with his large brown hand . " foolish , foolish pride ! how long then will it be ere i can scourge it forth ? be i then never to conquer it ? oh , strong , strong be the ty of flesh , and hard it be to subdue the spirit ! i come , friend , of a noble house , and i can bring myself to touch this money , even though it be to save me from the grave . " " alas ! father , " say , " how then can we be of help to ? " " i have sit down here to die , " quoth the palmer ; " but for many year i have carry in my wallet these precious thing which you see set forth now before me . it be sin , think i , that my secret should perish with me . i shall therefore sell these thing to the first worthy passer-by , and from them i shall have money enough to take me to the shrine of our at , where i hope to lay these old bone . " " what be these treasure , then , father ? " ask . " i can but see an old rusty nail , with bit of stone and slip of wood . " " my friend , " answer the palmer , " not all the money that be in this country could pay a just price for these ware of mine . this nail , " he continue , pull off his hat and turn up his sightless orb , " be one of those wherewith man 's salvation be secure . i have it , together with this piece of the true rood , from the descendant of of , who still live in alive and well , though latterly much afflict by boil . aye , you may well cross , and i beg that you will not breathe upon it or touch it with your finger . " " and the wood and stone , holy father ? " ask , with bate breath , as he stare awe-struck at his precious relic . " this cantle of wood be from the true cross , this other from his ark , and the third be from the door-post of the temple of the wise . this stone be throw at the sainted , and the other two be from the of . here , too , be part of 's rod , and a lock of hair from the prophet . " " but , father , " quoth , " the holy be bald , which bring down upon him the revilement of the wicked child . " " it be very true that he have not much hair , " say the palmer quickly , " and it be this which make this relic so exceed precious . take now your choice of these , my worthy gentleman , and pay such a price as your conscience will suffer you to offer ; for i be not a chapman nor a huckster , and i would never part with them , do i not know that i be very near to my reward . " " , " say excitedly , " this be such a chance as few folk have twice in one life . the nail i must have , and i will give it to the abbey of , so that all the folk in may go thither to wonder and to pray . " " and i will have the stone from the temple , " cry . " what would not my old mother give to have it hang over her bed ? " " and i will have 's rod , " quoth . " i have but five florin in the world , and here be four of them . " " here be three more , " say . " and here be five more , " add . " holy father , i hand you twelve florin , which be all that we can give , though we well know how poor a pay it be for the wondrous thing which you sell us . " " down , pride , down ! " cry the pilgrim , still beat upon his chest . " can i not bend myself then to take this sorry sum which be offer me for that which have cost me the labor of a life . give me the dross ! here be the precious relic , and , oh , i pray you that you will handle them softly and with reverence , else have i rather leave my unworthy bone here by the wayside . " with doff cap and eager hand , the comrade take their new and precious possession , and press onwards upon their journey , leave the age palmer still seat under the cherry-tree . they ride in silence , each with his treasure in his hand , glance at it from time to time , and scarce able to believe that chance have make them sole owner of relic of such holiness and worth that every abbey and church in would have bid eagerly for their possession . so they journey , full of this good fortune , until opposite the town of , where 's horse cast a shoe , and they be glad to find a wayside smith who might set the matter to right . to him narrate the good hap which have befall them ; but the smith , when his eye light upon the relic , lean up against his anvil and laugh , with his hand to his side , until the tear hop down his sooty cheek . " why , master , " quoth he , " this man be a , or seller of false relic , and be here in the smithy not two hour ago . this nail that he have sell you be take from my , and as to the wood and the stone , you will see a heap of both outside from which he have fill his scrip . " " , nay , " cry , " this be a holy man who have journey to , and acquire a dropsy by run from the house of to the of . " " i know not about that , " say the smith ; " but i know that a man with a gray palmer 's hat and gown be here no very long time ago , and that he sit on yonder stump and eat a cold pullet and drink a flask of wine . then he beg from me one of my nail , and fill his scrip with stone , he go upon his way . look at these nail , and see if they be not the same as that which he have sell you . " " now may save us ! " cry , all aghast . " be there no end then to the wickedness of humankind ? he so humble , so age , so loth to take our yet a villain and a cheat . whom can we trust or believe in ? " " i will after him , " say , fling himself into the saddle . " come , , we may catch him ere 's horse be shoe . " away they gallop together , and ere long they see the old gray palmer walk slowly along in front of them . he turn , however , at the sound of their hoof , and it be clear that his blindness be a cheat like all the rest of him , for he run swiftly through a field and so into a wood , where none could follow him . they hurl their relic after him , and so ride back to the blacksmith be the poor both in pocket and in faith . it be evening before the three comrade come into . there they find and safely lodge at the sign of the " , " where they sup on good fare and sleep between sheet . it chance , however , that a knight of , , be stay there on his way back from , where he have serve a term with the teutonic knight under the of the presbytery of . he and sit late in high converse as to , outfall , and the of city , with many tale of warlike man and valiant deed . then their talk turn to minstrelsy , and the stranger knight draw forth a cittern , upon which he play the of the north , sing the while in a high cracked voice of and and , and all the strength and beauty of the land of . to this answer with the romance of , and of , and so through the long winter night they sit by the crackle answer each other 's song until the crow cock join in their concert . yet , with scarce an hour of rest , be as blithe and bright as ever as they set forth after breakfast upon their way . " this be a very worthy man , " say he to his squire as they ride from the " . " " he have a very strong desire to advance himself , and would have enter upon some small knightly debate with me , have he not chance to have his break by the kick of a horse . i have conceive a great love for him , and i have promise him that when his bone be mend i will exchange thrust with him . but we must keep to this road upon the left . " " , my fair lord , " quoth . " the road to be over the river , and so through and the . " " true , my good ; but i have learn from this worthy knight , who have come over the french march , that there be a company of englishman who be burn and plunder in the country round . i have little doubt , from what he say , that they be those whom we seek . " " by my hilt ! it be like enough , " say . " by all account they have be so long at , that there would be little there worth the taking . then as they have already be in the south , they would come north to the country of the . " " we shall follow the lot until we come to , and then cross the march into , " say . " by ! as we be but a small band , it be very likely that we may have some very honorable and pleasing adventure , for i hear that there be little peace upon the french border . " all morning they ride down a broad and wind road , bar with the shadow of poplar . ride in front with his squire , while the two archer follow behind with the sumpter mule between them . they have leave and the far to the south , and ride now by the tranquil lot , which curve blue and placid through a gently rolling country . could not but mark that , whereas in there have be many and few castle , there be now many castle and few house . on either hand gray wall and square grim keep peep out at every few mile from amid the forest while the few village which they pass be all ringed round with rude wall , which speak of the constant fear and sudden foray of a wild frontier land . twice during the morning there come band of horseman swoop down upon them from the black gateway of wayside stronghold , with short , stern question as to whence they come and what their errand . band of armed man clank along the highway , and the few line of laden mule which carry the merchandise of the trader be guard by armed varlet , or by archer hire for the service . " the peace of have not make much change in these part , " quoth , " for the country be overrun with free companion and masterless man . yonder tower , between the wood and the hill , mark the town of , and beyond it be the land of . but here be a man by the wayside , and as he have two horse and a squire i make little doubt that he be a knight . i pray you , , to give him greet from me , and to ask him for his title and . it may be that i can relieve him of some vow , or perchance he have a lady whom he would wish to advance . " " , my fair lord , " say , " these be not horse and a squire , but mule and a varlet . the man be a mercer , for he have a great bundle beside him . " " now , 's blessing on your honest english voice ! " cry the stranger , prick up his ear at the sound of 's word . " never have i hear music that be so sweet to mine ear . come , lad , throw the bale over 's back ! my heart be nigh broke , for it seem that i have leave all that be english behind me , and that i would never set eye upon market square again . " he be a tall , lusty , middle-aged man with a ruddy face , a brown forked beard shot with gray , and a broad hat set at the back of his head . his servant , as tall as himself , but gaunt and raw-boned , have swing the bale on the back of one mule , while the merchant mount upon the other and ride to join the party . it be easy to see , as he approach , from the quality of his dress and the richness of his trapping , that he be a man of some wealth and position . " knight , " say he , " my name be , and i be a burgher and alderman of the good town of , where i live five door from the church of our , as all man know on the bank of . i have here my bale of cloth which i carry to worth the day that ever i start on such an errand ! i crave your gracious protection upon the way for me , my servant , and my ; for i have already have many perilous passage , and have now learn that , the of , be out upon the road in front of me . i hereby agree to give you one if you bring me safe to the inn of the ' ' in , the same to be repay to me or my heir if any harm come to me or my good . " " by ! " answer , " i should be a sorry knight if i ask pay for stand by a countryman in a strange land . you may ride with me and welcome , , and your varlet may follow with my archer . " " 's benison upon bounty ! " cry the stranger . " should you come to you may have cause to remember that you have be of service to . it be not very far to , for surely i see the cathedral tower against the ; but i have hear much of this , and the more i hear the less do i wish to look upon his face . oh , but i be sick and weary of it all , and i would give half that i be worth to see my good dame sit in peace beside me , and to hear the bell of town . " " your word be strange to me , " quoth , " for you have the appearance of a stout man , and i see that you wear a sword by your side . " " yet it be not my trade , " answer the merchant . " i doubt not that if i set you down in my shop at you might scarce tell fustian from , and know little difference between the velvet of and the cloth of . there you might well turn to me for help . but here on a lone roadside , with thick wood and , i turn to you , for it be the business to which you have be rear . " " there be sooth in what you say , , " say , " and i trust that we may come upon this , for i have hear that he be a very stout and skilful soldier , and a man from whom much honor be to be gain . " " he be a bloody robber , " say the trader , curtly , " and i wish i see him kick at the end of a halter . " " it be such man as he , " remark , " who give the true knight honorable deed to do , whereby he may advance himself . " " it be such man as he , " retort , " who be like rat in a or moth in a , a harm and a hindrance to all peaceful and honest man . " " yet , if the danger of the road weigh so heavily upon you , master alderman , it be a great marvel to me that you should venture so far from home . " " and sometimes , sir knight , it be a marvel to myself . but i be a man who may and grumble , but when i have set my face to do a thing i will not turn my back upon it until it be do . there be one , , at , who will send me for my , so to i will go , though all the of be to line the road like yonder poplar . " " stoutly speak , master alderman ! but how have you fare hitherto ? " " as a lamb fare in a land of wolf . five time we have have to beg and pray ere we could pass . twice i have pay toll to the warden of the road . three time we have have to draw , and once at we stand over our , and , and we lay about us for as long as a man might chant a litany , slay one rogue and wound two other . by 's coif ! we be man of peace , but we be free english burgher , not to be mishandle either in our country or abroad . neither lord , baron , knight , or commoner shall have as much as a strike of flax of mine whilst i have strength to wag this sword . " " and a pass strange sword it be , " quoth . " what make you , , of these black line which be draw across the sheath ? " " i can tell what they be , my fair lord . " " nor can i , " say . the merchant chuckle to himself . " it be a thought of mine own , " say he ; " for the sword be make by , the armorer , who be betroth to my second daughter . know then that the sheath be one , in length , mark off accord to foot and inch to serve me as a measure wand . it be also of the exact weight of two pound , so that i may use it in the balance . " " by ! " quoth , " it be very clear to me that the sword be like , good alderman , apt either for war or for peace . but i doubt not that even in you have have much to suffer from the hand of robber and outlaw . " " it be only last , sir knight , that i be leave for dead near reading as i journey to fair . yet i have the rogue up at the court of , and they will harm no more peaceful trader . " " you travel much then ! " " to , , fair , , and 's in . the rest of the year you may ever find me five door from the church of our , where i would from my heart that i be at this moment , for there be no air like air , and no water like the , nor can all the wine of compare with the beer of old who keep the ' . ' but , out and , here be an evil fruit which hang upon this ! " as he speak they have ride round a curve of the road and come upon a great tree which shoot one strong brown branch across their path . from the centre of this branch there hang a man , with his head at a horrid slant to his body and his toe just touch the ground . he be naked save for a linen under shirt and pair of woollen drawer . beside him on a green bank there sit a small man with a solemn face , and a great bundle of paper of all color thrust forth from the scrip which lie beside him . he be very richly dress , with furred robe , a scarlet hood , and wide hang sleeve line with silk . a great gold chain hang round his neck , and ring glitter from every finger of his hand . on his lap he have a little pile of gold and of silver , which he be drop , coin by coin , into a plump pouch which hang from his girdle . " the saint be with you , good traveller ! " he shout , as the party ride up . " the four evangelist watch over you ! may the twelve bear you up ! may the bless army of martyr direct your foot and lead you to eternal bliss ! " " for these good wish ! " say . " but i perceive , master alderman , that this man who hang here be , by mark of foot , the very of whom we have speak . but there be a cartel pin upon his breast , and i pray you , , to read it to me . " the dead robber swing slowly to and fro in the wintry wind , a fix smile upon his swarthy face , and his bulge eye still glare down the highway of which he have so long be the terror ; on a sheet of parchment upon his breast be print in rude character ; . du de , et de de , tre et tre puissant , de et . pa , pa , pa . " he take a sorry time in die , " say the man who sit beside him . " he could stretch one toe to the ground and bear himself up , so that i think he would never have do . now at last , however , he be safely in paradise , and so i may jog on upon my earthly way . " he mount , as he speak , a white mule which have be graze by the wayside , all gay with fustian of gold and silver bell , and ride onward with 's party . " how know you then that he be in paradise ? " ask . " all thing be possible to , but , certes , without a miracle , i should scarce expect to find the soul of amongst the just . " " i know that he be there because i have just pass him in there , " answer the stranger , rub his bejewel hand together in placid satisfaction . " it be my holy mission to be a or pardoner . i be the unworthy servant and delegate of him who hold the key . a contrite heart and ten noble to holy mother church may stave off perdition ; but he have a pardon of the first degree , with a livre benison , so that i doubt if he will so much as feel a twinge of purgatory . i come up even as the seneschal 's archer be tie him up , and i give him my that i would bide with him until he have pass . there be two leaden crown among the silver , but i would not for that stand in the way of his salvation . " " by ! " say , " if you have indeed this power to open and to shut the gate of hope , then indeed you stand high above mankind . but if you do but claim to have it , and yet have it not , then it seem to me , master clerk , that you may yourself find the gate bar when you shall ask admittance . " " small of faith ! small of faith ! " cry the . " ah , yet walk upon earth ! and yet no word of doubt can bring anger to mine heart , or a bitter word to my lip , for be i not a poor unworthy worker in the cause of gentleness and peace ? of all these pardon which i bear every one be stamp and sign by our holy father , the prop and centre of . " " which of them ? " ask . " , ! " cry the pardoner , shake a jewel forefinger . " thou wouldst be deep in the secret of mother church ? know then that i have both in my scrip . those who hold with shall have 's pardon , while i have 's for the he who be in doubt may have both , so that come what may he shall be secure . i pray you that you will buy one , for war be bloody work , and the end be sudden with little time for thought or shrift . or you , sir , for you seem to me to be a man who would do ill to trust to your own merit . " this to the alderman of , who have listen to him with a frown brow and a sneering lip . " when i sell my cloth , " quoth he , " he who buy may weigh and feel and handle . these good which you sell be not to be see , nor be there any proof that you hold them . certes , if mortal man might control 's mercy , it would be one of a lofty and god-like life , and not one who be deck out with ring and chain and silk , like a at a . " thou wicked and shameless man ! " cry the clerk . " thou dare to raise voice against the unworthy servant of mother church ? " " unworthy enough ! " quoth . " i would have you to know , clerk , that i be a free english burgher , and that i dare say my mind to our father the himself , let alone such a 's as you ! " " and foul-mouthed knave ! " cry the . " you prate of holy thing , to which your hog 's mind can never rise . keep silence , lest i call a curse upon you ! " " silence yourself ! " roar the other . " foul bird ! we find by the gallows like a carrion-crow . a fine life thou of it with silk and bauble , cozen the last few shilling from the pouch of die man . a fig for curse ! bide here , if you will take my rede , for we will make too hot for such as you , when have the order of it . thou vile thief ! it be you , and such as you , who bring an evil name upon the many churchman who lead a pure and a holy life . thou outside the door of heaven ! more like to be inside the door of hell . " at this crown insult the , with a face ashen with rage , raise up a quiver hand and begin pour latin imprecation upon the angry alderman . the latter , however , be not a man to be quell by word , for he catch up his and belabor the curse clerk with it . the latter , unable to escape from the shower of blow , set spur to his mule and ride for his life , with his enemy thunder behind him . at sight of his master 's sudden departure , the varlet set off after him , with the beside him , so that the four clatter away down the road together , until they sweep round a curve and their babble be but a drone in the distance . and gaze in astonishment at one another , while burst out . " ! " say the knight , " this must be one of those about whom of the priory have so much to say . yet he seem to be no bad man from what i have see of him . " " i have hear that have many follower in , " answer . " by ! i have no great love for them , " quoth . " i be a man who be slow to change ; and , if you take away from me the faith that i have be teach , it would be long ere i could learn one to set in its place . it be but a chip here and a chip there , yet it may bring the tree down in time . yet , on the other hand , i can but think it shame that a man should turn 's mercy on and off , as a do wine with a spigot . " " nor be it , " say , " part of the teaching of that mother church of which he have so much to say . there be sooth in what the alderman say of it . " " then , by ! they may settle it betwixt them , " quoth . " for me , i serve , the king and my lady ; and so long as i can keep the path of honor i be well content . my creed shall ever be that of : " , au chevalier . " after pass , the party branch away from the main road , and leave the river to the north of them , follow a small track which wind over a vast and desolate plain . this path lead them amid marsh and wood , until it bring them out into a glade with a broad stream swirl swiftly down the centre of it . through this the horse splash their way , and on the farther shore announce to them that they be now within the border of the land of . for some mile they still follow the same lonely track , which lead them through a dense wood , and then widen out , curve down to an open rolling country , such as they have traverse between and . if it be grim and desolate upon the english border , however , what can describe the hideous barrenness of this ten time harry tract of ? the whole face of the country be scar and disfigure , mottle over with the black blotch of burned , and the gray , gaunt of what have be chateau . break fence , crumble wall , vineyard litter with stone , the shattered arch of where you might , the sign of ruin and rapine meet the eye . here and there only , on the farthest , the gnarled turret of a castle , or the graceful pinnacle of church or of monastery show where the force of the sword or of the spirit have preserve some small islet of security in this universal flood of misery . moodily and in silence the little party ride along the narrow and irregular track , their heart weigh down by this land of despair . it be indeed a stricken and a blight country , and a man might have ride from auvergne in the north to the march of , nor ever see a smile village or a thriving homestead . from time to time as they advance they see strange lean figure scrape and scratch amid the weed and thistle , who , on sight of the band of horseman , throw up their arm and dive in among the brushwood , as shy and as swift as wild animal . more than once , however , they come on family by the wayside , who be too weak from hunger and disease to fly , so that they could but sit like hare on a tussock , with pant chest and terror in their eye . so gaunt be these poor folk , so worn and bent and knotted frame , and sullen , hopeless , mutinous it make the young englishman to look upon them . indeed , it seem as though all hope and light have go so far from them that it be not to be bring back ; for when throw down a handful of silver among them there come no softening of their line face , but they clutch greedily at the coin , peer questioningly at him , and champ with their animal jaw . here and there amid the brushwood the traveller see the rude bundle of stick which serve them as a like a fowl 's nest than the of man . yet why should they build and strive , when the first adventurer who pass would set torch to their thatch , and when their own feudal lord would wring from them with blow and curse the last fruit of their toil ? they sit at the low depth of human misery , and hug a bitter comfort to their soul as they realize that they could go no low . yet they have still the human gift of speech , and would take council among themselves in their brushwood hovel , glare with blear eye and point with thin finger at the great widespread chateau which eat like a cancer into the life of the . when such man , who be beyond hope and fear , begin in their dim mind to see the source of their woe , it may be an evil time for those who have wrong them . the weak man become strong when he have nothing , for then only can he feel the wild , mad thrill of despair . high and strong the chateau , lowly and weak the brushwood hut ; but help the seigneur and his lady when the man of the brushwood set their hand to the work of revenge ! through such country do the party ride for eight or it might be nine mile , until the sun begin to slope down in the west and their shadow to stream down the road in front of them . wary and careful they must be , with watchful eye to the right and the left , for this be no man 's land , and their only passport be those which hang from their belt . frenchman and englishman , and , , , , , and , wander and struggle over the whole of this accursed district . so bare and cheerless be the outlook , and so few and poor the dwelling , that begin to have fear as to whether he might find food and quarter for his little troop . it be a relief to him , therefore , when their narrow track open out upon a large road , and they see some little way down it a square white house with a great bunch of holly hang out at the end of a stick from one of the upper window . " by ! " say he , " i be right glad ; for i have fear that we might have neither nor . ride on , , and tell this inn-keeper that an english knight with his party will lodge with him this night . " set spur to his horse and reach the inn door a long before his companion . neither varlet nor ostler could be see , so he push open the door and call loudly for the landlord . three time he shout , but , receive no reply , he open an inner door and advance into the chief of the hostel . a very cheerful be sputter and crack in an open grate at the further end of the apartment . at one side of this fire , in a high-backed oak chair , sit a lady , her face turn towards the door . the firelight play over her feature , and think that he have never see such queenly power , such dignity and strength , upon a woman 's face . she might have be year of age , with aquiline nose , firm yet sensitive mouth , dark curve brow , and deep-set eye which shine and sparkle with a shift brilliancy . beautiful as she be , it be not her beauty which impress itself upon the beholder ; it be her strength , her power , the sense of wisdom which hang over the broad white brow , the decision which lie in the square jaw and delicately mould chin . a chaplet of pearl sparkle amid her black hair , with a gauze of silver network flow back from it over her shoulder ; a black mantle be swathe round her , and she lean back in her chair as one who be fresh from a journey . in the opposite corner there sit a very burly and broad-shouldered man , clad in a black jerkin trim with sable , with a black velvet cap with curl white feather cock upon the side of his head . a flask of red wine stand at his elbow , and he seem to be very much at his ease , for his foot be stick up on a stool , and between his thigh he hold a dish full of nut . these he crack between his strong white tooth and chew in a leisurely way , cast the shell into the blaze . as gaze in at him he turn his face half round and cock an eye at him over his shoulder . it seem to the young englishman that he have never see so hideous a face , for the eye be of the light green , the nose be break and drive inwards , while the whole countenance be sear and pucker with wound . the voice , too , when he speak , be as deep and as fierce as the growl of a beast of prey . " young man , " say he , " i know not who you may be , and i be not much incline to bestir myself , but if it be not that i be bend upon take my ease , i swear , by the sword of ! that i would lay my across your shoulder for dare to fill the air with these discordant . " take aback at this speech , and scarce know how to answer it fitly in the presence of the lady , stand with his hand upon the handle of the door , while and his companion dismount . at the sound of these fresh voice , and of the tongue in which they speak , the stranger crash his dish of nut down upon the floor , and begin himself to call for the landlord until the whole house re-echo with his roaring . with an ashen face the host come run at his call , his hand shake and his very hair bristle with apprehension . " for the sake of , sir , " he whisper as he pass , " speak him fair and do not rouse him ! for the love of the , be mild with him ! " " who be this , then ? " ask . be about to explain , when a fresh roar from the stranger interrupt him . " thou villain inn-keeper , " he shout , " do i not ask you when i bring my lady here whether your inn be clean ? " " you do , sire . " " do i not very particularly ask you whether there be any vermin in it ? " " you do , sire . " " and you answer me ? " " that there be not , sire . " " and yet ere i have be here an hour i find englishman crawl about within it . where be we to be free from this pestilent race ? can a frenchman upon french land not sit down in a french auberge without have his ear pain by the clack of their hideous talk ? send them packing , inn-keeper , or it may be the bad for them and for you . " " i will , sire , i will ! " cry the frightened host , and bustle from the room , while the soft , soothing voice of the woman be hear remonstrate with her furious companion . " indeed , gentleman , you have well go , " say mine host . " it be but six mile to , where there be very good quarter at the sign of ' . ' " " , " answer , " i can go until i have see more of this person , for he appear to be a man from whom much be to be hope . what be his name and title ? " " it be not for my lip to name it unless by his desire . but i beg and pray you , gentleman , that you will go from my house , for i know not what may come of it if his rage should gain the mastery of him . " " by ! " lisp , " this be certainly a man whom it be worth journey far to know . go tell him that a humble knight of would make his further honorable acquaintance , not from any presumption , pride , or ill-will , but for the advancement of chivalry and the glory of our lady . give him greet from , and say that the glove which i bear in my cap belong to the most peerless and lovely of her sex , whom i be now ready to uphold against any lady whose claim he might be desirous of advance . " the landlord be hesitate whether to carry this message or no , when the door of the inner room be fling open , and the stranger bound out like a panther from its den , his hair bristle and his deformed face convulse with anger . " still here ! " he snarl . " dog of , must be lash hence ? , my sword ! " he turn to seize his weapon , but as he do so his gaze fall upon the blazonry of sir 's shield , and he stand stare , while the fire in his strange green eye soften into a sly and humorous twinkle . " ! " cry he , " it be my little swordsman of . i should remember that , see that it be but three day since i look upon it in the list by . ah ! , ! you owe me a return for this , " and he touch his right arm , which be gird round just under the shoulder with a silken kerchief . but the surprise of the stranger at the sight of be as nothing compare with the astonishment and the delight which shine upon the face of the knight of as he look upon the strange face of the frenchman . twice he open his mouth and twice he peer again , as though to assure himself that his eye have not play him a trick . " ! " he gasp at last . " ! " " by ! " shout the french soldier , with a hoarse roar of laughter , " it be well that i should ride with my vizor down , for he that have once see my face do not need to be tell my name . it be indeed i , , and here be my hand ! i give you my word that there be but three englishman in this world whom i would touch save with the sharp edge of the sword : the prince be one , the second , and you the third ; for i have hear much that be good of you . " " i be grow age , and be somewhat spend in the war , " quoth ; " but i can lay by my sword now with an easy mind , for i can say that i have cross sword with him who have the brave heart and the strong arm of all this great kingdom of . i have long for it , i have dream of it , and now i can scarce bring my mind to understand that this great honor have indeed be mine . " " by the of ! you have give me cause to be very certain of it , " say , with a gleam of his broad white tooth . " and perhaps , most honor sir , it would please you to continue the debate . perhaps you would condescend to go farther into the matter . he know that i be unworthy of such honor , yet i can show my quartering , and i have be present at some and during these twenty year . " " your fame be very well know to me , and i shall ask my lady to enter your name upon my tablet , " say . " there be many who wish to advance themselves , and who bide their turn , for i refuse no man who come on such an errand . at present it may not be , for mine arm be stiff from this small touch , and i would fain do you full honor when we cross sword again . come in with me , and let your squire come also , that my sweet spouse , the , may say that she have see so famed and gentle a knight . " into the chamber they go in all peace and concord , where the sit like queen on throne for each in turn to be present to her . sooth to say , the stout heart of , which care little for the wrath of her spouse , be somewhat shake by the calm , cold face of this stately dame , for twenty year of have leave him more at ease in the list than in a lady 's boudoir . he bethink him , too , as he look at her set lip and deep-set question eye , that he have hear strange tale of this same . be it not she who be say to lay hand upon the sick and raise them from their couch when the leech have spend their last nostrum ? have she not forecast the future , and be there not time when in the loneliness of her chamber she be hear to hold converse with some being upon whom mortal eye never dark familiar who pass where door be bar and window high ? sink his eye and mark a cross on the side of his leg as he greet this dangerous dame , and yet ere five minute have pass he be hers , and not he only but his two young squire as well . the mind have go out of them , and they could but look at this woman and listen to the word which fall from her which thrill through their nerve and stir their soul like the of a bugle . often in peaceful be to think of that scene of the wayside inn of auvergne . the shadow of evening have fall , and the corner of the long , low , room be drape in darkness . the sputter wood fire throw out a circle of red flicker light which play over the little group of wayfarer , and show up every line and shadow upon their face . sit with elbow upon knee , and chin upon hand , his patch still cover one eye , but his other shine like a star , while the ruddy light gleam upon his smooth white head . be seat at his left , his lip part , his eye stare , and a fleck of deep color on either cheek , his limb all rigid as one who fear to move . on the other side the famous french captain lean back in his chair , a litter of upon his lap , his huge head half bury in a cushion , while his eye wander with an amused gleam from his dame to the stare , enrapture englishman . then , last of all , that pale clear-cut face , that sweet clear voice , with its high thrilling talk of the deathlessness of glory , of the worthlessness of life , of the pain of ignoble joy , and of the joy which lie in all pain which lead to a noble end . still , as the shadow deepen , she speak of valor and virtue , of loyalty , honor , and fame , and still they sit drinking in her word while the fire burn down and the red ash turn to gray . " by the sainted ! " cry at last , " it be time that we speak of what we be to do this night , for i can think that in this wayside auberge there be fit quarter for an honorable company . " give a long sigh as he come back from the dream of chivalry and hardihood into which this strange woman 's word have waft him . " i care not where i sleep , " say he ; " but these be indeed somewhat rude lodging for this fair lady . " " what content my lord content me , " quoth she . " i perceive , , that you be under vow , " she add , glance at his cover eye . " it be my purpose to attempt some small deed , " he answer . " and the it your lady 's ? " " it be indeed my sweet wife 's . " " who be doubtless proud of you . " " say rather i of her , " quoth he quickly . " he know that i be not worthy to be her humble servant . it be easy , lady , for a man to ride forth in the light of day , and do his when all man have eye for him . but in a woman 's heart there be a strength and truth which ask no praise , and can but be know to him whose treasure it be . " the smile across at her husband . " you have often tell me , , that there be very gentle knight amongst the english , " quoth she . " aye , aye , " say he moodily . " but to horse , , you and yours and we shall seek the chateau of , which be two mile on this side of . he be of auvergne , and mine old war companion . " " certes , he would have a welcome for you , " quoth ; " but indeed he might look askance at one who come without permit over the march . " " by the ! when he learn that you have come to draw away these rascal he will be very blithe to look upon your face . inn-keeper , here be ten gold piece . what be over and above your reckoning you may take off from your charge to the next needy knight who come this way . come then , for it grow late and the horse be stamp in the roadway . " the and her spouse spring upon their steed without set foot to stirrup , and away they jingle down the white moonlit highway , with at the lady 's , and a spear 's length behind them . have linger for an instant in the passage , and as he do so there come a wild outcry from a chamber upon the left , and out there run and , laugh together like two schoolboy who be bend upon a prank . at sight of they slink past him with somewhat of a air , and spring upon their horse gallop after their party . the hubbub within the chamber do not cease , however , but rather increase , with yell of : " a moi , mes ami ! a moi , ! a moi , champion ! a ! " so shrill be the outcry that both the inn-keeper and , with every varlet within hearing , rush wildly to the scene of the uproar . it be indeed a singular scene which meet their eye . the room be a long and lofty one , stone floor and bare , with a fire at the further end upon which a great pot be boil . a deal table run down the centre , with a wooden upon it and two horn cup . some way from it be a small table with a single beaker and a break . from the heavy wooden rafter which form the roof there hang row of hook which hold up side of bacon , joint of smoke beef , and string of onion for winter use . in the very centre of all these , upon the large hook of all , there hang a fat little red-faced man with enormous whisker , kick madly in the air and claw at rafter , ham , and all else that be within . the huge steel hook have be pass through the collar of his leather jerkin , and there he hang like a fish on a line , writhe , twist , and scream , but utterly unable to free himself from his extraordinary position . it be not until and the landlord have mount on the table that they be able to lift him down , when he sink gasp with rage into a seat , and roll his eye round in every direction . " have he go ? " quoth he . " go ? who ? " " he , the man with the red head , the giant man . " " yes , " say , " he have go . " " and come not back ? " " no. " " the good for him ! " cry the little man , with a long sigh of relief . " ! what ! be i not the champion of the of ? ah , could i have descend , could i have come down , ere he flee ! then you would have see . you would have behold a spectacle then . there would have be one rascal the less upon earth . , yes ! " " good master , " say the landlord , " these gentleman have not go very fast , and i have a horse in the stable at your disposal , for i would rather have such bloody doing as you threaten outside the four wall of mine auberge . " " i hurt my leg and can ride , " quoth the bishop 's champion . " i strain a sinew on the day that i slay the three man at . " " save you , master ! " cry the landlord . " it must be an awesome thing to have so much blood upon one 's soul . and yet i do not wish to see so valiant a man mishandle , and so i will , for friendship 's sake , ride after this englishman and bring him back to you . " " you shall not stir , " cry the champion , seize the inn-keeper in a convulsive grasp . " i have a love for you , , and i would not bring your house into ill repute , nor do such to these wall and chattel as must befall if two such man as this englishman and i fall to work here . " " , think not of me ! " cry the inn-keeper . " what be my wall when set against the honor of , champion of the of . my horse , ! " " by the saint , no ! , i will not have it ! you have say truly that it be an awesome thing to have such rough work upon one 's soul . i be but a rude soldier , yet i have a mind . ! i reflect , i weigh , i balance . shall i not meet this man again ? shall i not bear him in mind ? shall i not know him by his great paw and his red head ? , yes ! " " and may i ask , sir , " say , " why it be that you call yourself champion of the of ? " " you may ask aught which it be become to me to answer . the bishop have need of a champion , because , if any cause be set to test of combat , it would scarce become his office to go down into the list with leather and shield and cudgel to exchange blow with any varlet . he look around him then for some try fighting man , some honest smiter who can give a blow or take one . it be not for me to say how far he have succeed , but it be sooth that he who think that he have but to do with the of , find himself face to face with . " at this moment there be a clatter of hoof upon the road , and a varlet by the door cry out that one of the englishman be come back . the champion look wildly about for some corner of safety , and be clamber up towards the window , when 's voice sound from without , call upon to hasten , or he might scarce find his way . bidding adieu to landlord and to champion , therefore , he set off at a gallop , and soon overtake the two archer . " a pretty thing this , , " say he . " thou wilt have holy church upon you if you hang her champion upon iron hook in an inn kitchen . " " it be do without think , " he answer apologetically , while burst into a shout of laughter . " by my hilt ! petit , " say he , " you would have laugh also could you have see it . for this man be so swell with pride that he would neither drink with us , nor sit at the same table with us , nor as much as answer a question , but must needs talk to the varlet all the time that it be well there be peace , and that he have slay more englishman than there be tag to his doublet . our good old could scarce lay his tongue to french enough to answer him , so he must needs reach out his great hand to him and place him very gently where you see him . but we must on , for i can scarce hear their hoof upon the road . " " i think that i can see them yet , " say , peer down the moonlit road . " ! yes . now they ride forth from the shadow . and yonder dark clump be the of . en avant ! or may reach the gate before us . but hark , mes ami , what sound be that ? " as he speak the hoarse blast of a horn be hear from some wood upon the right . an answering call ring forth upon their left , and hard upon it two other from behind them . " they be the horn of , " quoth . " though why they blow them so late i can tell . " " let us on , then , " say , and the whole party , set their spur to their horse , soon find themselves at the of , where the drawbridge have already be lower and the portcullis raise in response to the summons of . , of auvergne and of , be a fierce and renowned soldier who have grow gray in the english war . as lord of the march and guardian of an exposed , there be little rest for him even in time of so-called peace , and his whole life be spend in raid and outfall upon the , late-comer , flayer , free companion , and rove archer who wander over his province . at time he would come back in triumph , and a dozen corps swing from the summit of his keep would warn evil-doer that there be still a law in the land . at other his venture be not so happy , and he and his troop would spur it over the drawbridge with clatter of hoof hard at their heel and whistle of arrow about their ear . hard he be of hand and hard of heart , hate by his foe , and yet not love by those whom he protect , for twice he have be take prisoner , and twice his ransom have be wring by dint of blow and torture out of the starve peasant and ruin farmer . wolf or watch-dog , it be hard to say from which the sheep have most to fear . the of be harsh and stern as its master . a broad moat , a high outer wall turreted at the corner , with a great black keep towering above it lie before them in the moonlight . by the light of two flambeau , protrude through the narrow opening at either side of the ponderous gate , they catch a glimpse of the glitter of fierce eye and of the gleam of the weapon of the guard . the sight of the two-headed eagle of , however , be a passport into any fortalice in , and ere they have pass the gate the old border knight come run forwards with hand to greet his famous countryman . nor be he less glad to see , when the englishman 's errand be explain to him , for these archer have be a sore thorn in his side and have rout two expedition which he have send against them . a happy day it would be for the of auvergne when they should learn that the last yew bow be over the march . the material for a feast be ever at hand in day when , if there be grim want in the cottage , there be at least rude plenty in the castle . within an hour the guest be seat around a board which creak under the great pasty and joint of meat , vary by those more dainty dish in which the excel , the spice ortolan and the . the , a bright and dame , sit upon the left of her warlike spouse , with upon the right . beneath sit and , with , of the order of the , and , a wander knight from the kingdom of . these with and , four french squire , and the castle chaplain , make the company who sit together that night and make good cheer in the of . the great fire crackle in the grate , the hooded hawk sleep upon their perch , the rough with expectant eye crouch upon the tile floor ; close at the elbow of the guest stand the dapper little page ; the laugh and jest circle round and all be harmony and comfort . little they reck of the brushwood man who crouch in their rag along the fringe of the forest and look with wild and haggard eye at the rich , warm glow which shoot a golden bar of light from the high arched window of the castle . supper over , the table dormant be clear away as by magic and trestle and arrange around the blaze fire , for there be a bitter nip in the air . the have sink back in her cushion chair , and her long dark lash droop low over her sparkling eye . , glance at her , note that her breath come quick and short , and that her cheek have blanch to a lily white . eye her keenly from time to time , and pass his broad brown finger through his crisp , curly black hair with the air of a man who be perplex in his mind . " these folk here , " say the knight of , " they do not seem too well feed . " " ah , canaille ! " cry the of . " you would scarce credit it , and yet it be sooth that when i be take at it be all that my wife and foster-brother could do to raise the money from them for my ransom . the sulky dog would rather have three twist of a rack , or the for an hour , than pay out a denier for their own feudal father and liege lord . yet there be not one of them but have an old stocking full of gold piece hide away in a snug corner . " " why do they not buy food then ? " ask . " by ! it seem to me their bone be break through their skin . " " it be their and grumble which make them thin . we have a say here , , that if you pummel he will pat you , but if you pat him he will pummel you . doubtless you find it so in . " " , no ! " say . " i have two englishman of this class in my train , who be at this instant , i make little doubt , as full of your wine as any cask in your cellar . he who pummel them might come by such a pat as he would be likely to remember . " " i can understand it , " quoth the seneschal , " for the english knight and noble whom i have meet be not man to brook the insolence of the base bear . " " perchance , my fair lord , the poor folk be sweet and of a good countenance in , " laugh the . " ! you can conceive to yourself how ugly they be ! without hair , without tooth , all twisted and bent ; for me , i can think how the good ever come to make such people . i can bear it , i , and so my trusty go ever before me with a cudgel to drive them from my path . " " yet they have soul , fair lady , they have soul ! " murmur the chaplain , a white-haired man with a weary , patient face . " so i have hear you tell them , " say the lord of the castle ; " and for myself , father , though i be a true son of holy , yet i think that you be well employ in say your mass and in teach the child of my man-at-arms , than in go over the to put idea in these folk ' head which would never have be there but for you . i have hear that you have say to them that their soul be as good as ours , and that it be likely that in another life they may stand as high as the old blood of auvergne . for my part , i believe that there be so many worthy knight and gallant gentleman in heaven who know how such thing should be arrange , that there be little fear that we shall find ourselves mix up with base and . tell your bead , father , and con your psalter , but do not come between me and those whom the king have give to me ! " " help them ! " cry the old priest . " a high king than yours have give them to me , and i tell you here in your own castle hall , , that you have sin deeply in your dealing with these poor folk , and that the hour will come , and may even now be at hand , when 's hand will be heavy upon you for what you have do . " he rise as he speak , and walk slowly from the room . " pest take him ! " cry the french knight . " now , what be a man to do with a priest , ? -- one can neither fight him like a man nor coax him like a woman . " " ah , know , the naughty one ! " cry the . " have we not all hear how he go to and squeeze fifty thousand crown out of the . " " ! " say , look with a mixture of horror and admiration at . " do not your heart sink within you ? be you not smite with fear ? have you not feel a curse hang over you ? " " i have not observe it , " say the frenchman carelessly . " but by ! , this chaplain of yours seem to me to be a worthy man , and you should give heed to his word , for though i care nothing for the curse of a bad pope , it would be a grief to me to have aught but a blessing from a good priest . " " hark to that , my fair lord , " cry the . " take heed , i pray , for i do not wish to have a blight cast over me , nor a palsy of the limb . i remember that once before you anger , and my say that i lose more hair in seven day than ever before in a month . " " if that be sign of sin , then , by ! i have much upon my soul , " say , amid a general laugh . " but in very truth , , if i may venture a word of counsel , i should advise that you make your peace with this good man . " " he shall have four silver candlestick , " say the seneschal moodily . " and yet i would that he would leave the folk alone . you can conceive in your mind how stubborn and brainless they be . mule and pig be full of reason beside them . he know that i have have great patience with them . it be but last week that , have to raise some money , i call up to the castle , who , as all man know , have a of gold piece hide away in some hollow tree . i give you my word that i do not so much as lay a stripe upon his fool 's back , but after speak with him , and tell him how needful the money be to me , i leave him for the night to think over the matter in my dungeon . what think you that the dog do ? why , in the morning we find that he have make a rope from strip of his leathern jerkin , and have hang himself to the bar of the window . " " for me , i can conceive such wickedness ! " cry the lady . " and there be , as fair a maiden as eye could see , but as bad and bitter as the rest of them . when young be here last he look kindly upon the girl , and even speak of take her into his service . what do she do , with her dog of a father ? why , they tie themselves together and leap into the , where the water be five deep . i give you my word that it be a great grief to young , and it be day ere he could cast it from his mind . but how can one serve people who be so foolish and so ungrateful ? " whilst the of have be detail the evil doings of his tenant , have be unable to take his eye from the face of . she have lie back in her chair , with droop eyelid and bloodless face , so that he have fear at first her journey have weigh heavily upon her , and that the strength be ebb out of her . of a sudden , however , there come a change , for a dash of bright color flicker up on to either cheek , and her lid be slowly raise again upon eye which sparkle with such lustre as have never see in human eye before , while their gaze be fix intently , not on the company , but on the dark tapestry which drape the wall . so transform and so ethereal be her expression , that , in his lofty dream of archangel or of seraph , have never picture so sweet , so womanly , and yet so wise a face . glance at , see that he also be watch his wife closely , and from the twitch of his feature , and the bead upon his brow , it be easy to see that he be deeply agitate by the change which he mark in her . " how be it with you , lady ? " he ask at last , in a tremulous voice . her eye remain fix intently upon the wall , and there be a long pause ere she answer him . her voice , too , which have be so clear and ringing , be now low and muffle as that of one who speak from a distance . " all be very well with me , , " say she . " the bless hour of sight have come round to me again . " " i could see it come ! i could see it come ! " he exclaim , pass his finger through his hair with the same perplex expression as before . " this be untoward , , " he say at last . " and i scarce know in what word to make it clear to you , and to your fair wife , and to , and to these other stranger knight . my tongue be a blunt one , and fit to shout word of command than to clear up such a matter as this , of which i can myself understand little . this , however , i know , that my wife be come of a very sainted race , whom have in his wisdom endow with wondrous power , so that be know throughout ere ever i first see her at . yet these power be ever use for good , and they be the gift of and not of the devil , which be the difference betwixt white magic and black . " " perchance it would be as well that we should send for , " say . " it would be good that he should come , " cry the . " and bring with him a flask of holy water , " add the knight of . " not so , gentleman , " answer . " it be not needful that this priest should be call , and it be in my mind that in ask for this cast some slight shadow or slur upon the good name of my wife , as though it be still doubtful whether her power come to her from above or below . if have indeed such a doubt i pray that you will say so , that we may discuss the matter in a fitting way . " " for myself , " say , " i have hear such word fall from the lip of this lady that i be of the opinion that there be no woman , save only one , who can be in any way compare to her in beauty and in goodness . should any gentleman think otherwise , i should deem it great honor to run a small course with him , or debate the matter in whatever way might be most pleasing to him . " " nay , it would ill become me to cast a slur upon a lady who be both my guest and the wife of my comrade-in-arms , " say the of . " i have perceive also that on her mantle there be marked a silver cross , which be surely sign enough that there be nought of evil in these strange power which you say that she possess . " this argument of the seneschal be appeal so powerfully to the bohemian and to the hospitaller that they at once intimate that their objection have be entirely overcome , while even the , who have sit shiver and cross herself , cease to cast glance at the door , and allow her fear to turn to curiosity . " among the gift which have be vouchsafe to my wife , " say , " there be the wondrous one of see into the future ; but it come very seldom upon her , and go as quickly , for none can command it . the bless hour of sight , as she have name it , have come but twice since i have know her , and i can vouch for it that all that she have tell me be true , for on the evening of the of she say that the morrow would be an ill day for me and for of . ere the sun have sink again he be dead , and i the prisoner of . yet it be not every question that she can answer , but only those -- -- -- " " , ! " cry the lady in the same mutter far-away voice , " the bless hour pass . use it , , while you may . " " i will , my sweet . tell me , then , what fortune come upon me ? " " danger , , press creep upon you and you know it not . " the french soldier burst into a thunderous laugh , and his green eye twinkle with amusement . " at what time during these twenty year would not that have be a true word ? " he cry . " danger be in the air that i breathe . but be this so very close , ? " " upon you ! " the word come out in break , strenuous speech , while the lady 's fair face be writhe and draw like that of one who look upon a horror which strike the word from her lip . gaze round the tapestried room , at the screen , the table , the , the credence , the buffet with its silver salver , and the of friendly , wonder face . there be an utter stillness , save for the sharp breathing of the and for the gentle sough of the wind outside , which waft to their ear the distant call upon a 's horn . " the danger may bide , " say he , shrug his broad shoulder . " and now , , tell us what will come of this war in . " " i can see little , " she answer , strain her eye and pucker her brow , as one who would fain clear her sight . " there be mountain , and dry plain , and flash of arm and shout of . yet it be whisper to me that by failure you will succeed . " " ! , how like you that ? " quoth , shake his head . " it be like mead and vinegar , half sweet , half sour . and be there no question which you would ask my lady ? " " certes there be . i would fain know , fair lady , how all thing be at , and above all how my sweet lady employ herself . " " to answer this i would fain lay hand upon one whose thought turn strongly to this castle which you have name . nay , my , it be whisper to me that there be another here who have think more deeply of it than you . " " think more of mine own home ? " cry . " lady , i fear that in this matter at least you be mistake . " " not so , . come hither , young man , young english squire with the gray eye ! now give me your hand , and place it here across my brow , that i may see that which you have see . what be this that rise before me ? , mist , roll mist with a square black tower above it . see it shred out , it thin , it rise , and there lie a castle in green plain , with the sea beneath it , and a great church within a . there be two river which run through the meadow , and between them lie the tent of the besieger . " " the besieger ! " cry , , and , all three in a breath . " yes , truly , and they press hard upon the castle , for they be an exceed multitude and full of courage . see how they storm and rage against the gate , while some rear ladder , and other , line after line , sweep the wall with their arrow . there be many leader who shout and beckon , and one , a tall man with a golden beard , who stand before the gate stamp his foot and halloo them on , as a pricker do the hound . but those in the castle fight bravely . there be a woman , two woman , who stand upon the wall , and give heart to the man-at-arms . they shower down arrow , dart and great stone . ah ! they have strike down the tall leader , and the other give back . the mist thicken and i can see no more . " " by ! " say , " i do not think that there can be any such doings at , and i be very easy of the fortalice so long as my sweet wife hang the key of the outer bailey at the head of her bed . yet i will not deny that you have picture the castle as well as i could have do myself , and i be full of wonderment at all that i have hear and see . " " i would , , " cry the , " that you would use your power to tell me what have befall my golden bracelet which i wear when hawk upon the second of , and have never set eye upon since . " " , lady , " say , " it do not befit so great and wondrous a power to pry and search and play the varlet even to the beautiful chatelaine of . ask a worthy question , and , with the blessing of , you shall have a worthy answer . " " then i would fain ask , " cry one of the french squire , " as to which may hope to conquer in these war betwixt the english and ourselves . " " both will conquer and each will hold its own , " answer the . " then we shall still hold and ? " cry . the lady shake her head . " french land , french blood , french speech , " she answer . " they be french , and shall have them . " " but not ? " cry excitedly . " also be for . " " but ? " " too . " " woe worth me then , and ill hail to these evil word ! if and be go , then what be leave for ? " " it seem indeed that there be evil time come upon your country , " say . " in our fond hope we never think to hold . by ! this news have warm the heart within me . our dear country will then be very great in the future , ? " " great , and rich , and beautiful , " she cry . " far down the course of time i can see her still lead the nation , a wayward queen among the people , great in war , but great in peace , quick in thought , deft in action , with her people 's will for her sole monarch , from the sand of to the blue sea of the south . " " ! " cry , with his eye flash in triumph , " you hear her , ? -- she never yet say word which be not sooth . " the english knight shake his head moodily . " what of my own poor country ? " say he . " i fear , lady , that what you have say bode but small good for her . " the lady sit with parted lip , and her breath come quick and fast . " ! " she cry , " what be this that be show me ? whence come they , these people , these lordly nation , these mighty country which rise up before me ? i look beyond , and other rise , and yet other , far and farther to the shore of the uttermost water . they crowd ! they swarm ! the world be give to them , and it resound with the clang of their hammer and the ringing of their church bell . they call them many name , and they rule them this way or that but they be all english , for i can hear the voice of the people . on i go , and onwards over sea where man have never yet sail , and i see a great land under new star and a stranger sky , and still the land be . where have her child not go ? what have they not do ? her banner be plant on ice . her banner be scorch in the sun . she lie athwart the land , and her shadow be over the sea . , ! we be undo for the bud of her bud be even as our choicest flower ! " her voice rise into a wild cry , and throw up her arm she sink back white and nerveless into the deep oaken chair . " it be over , " say moodily , as he raise her droop head with his strong brown hand . " wine for the lady , squire ! the bless hour of sight have pass . " it be late ere , have carry the goblet of spice wine which it be his custom to drink after the curling of his hair , be able at last to seek his chamber . it be a room upon the second floor , with a bed in a recess for him , and two small pallet on the other side , on which and be already snore . have kneel down to his evening orison , when there come a tap at his door , and enter with a small lamp in his hand . his face be deadly pale , and his hand shake until the shadow flicker up and down the wall . " what be it , ? " cry , spring to his foot . " i can scarce tell you , " say he , sit down on the side of the couch , and rest his chin upon his hand . " i know not what to say or what to think . " " have aught befall you , then ? " " yes , or i have be slave to my own fancy . i tell you , lad , that i be all undo , like a fretted . hither , ! it can be that you have forget little , the daughter of the old at ? " " i remember her well . " " she and i , , break the lucky groat together ere we part , and she wear my ring upon her finger . ' , ' quoth she when last we part , ' i shall be near in the war , and danger will be my danger . ' , as be my help , as i come up the stair this night i see her stand before me , her face in tear , her hand out as though in see it , , even as i see those two archer upon their couch . our very seem to meet , ere she thin away like a mist in the sunshine . " " i would not give overmuch think to it , " answer . " our mind will play us strange prank , and bethink you that these word of the have wrought upon us and shake us . " shake his head . " i see little as clearly as though i be back at the at , " say he . " but the hour be late , and i must go . " " where do you sleep , then ? " " in the chamber above you . may the saint be with us all ! " he rise from the couch and leave the chamber , while could hear his foot sound upon the wind stair . the young squire walk across to the window and gaze out at the moonlit landscape , his mind absorb by the thought of the , and of the strange word that she have speak as to what be go forward at . lean his elbow upon the stonework , he be deeply plunge in reverie , when in a moment his thought be bring back to and to the scene before him . the window at which he stand be in the second floor of that portion of the castle which be nearest to the keep . in front lie the broad moat , with the moon lie upon its surface , now clear and round , now draw lengthwise as the breeze stir the water . beyond , the plain slope down to a thick wood , while further to the leave a second wood shut out the view . between the two an open glade stretch , silver in the moonshine , with the river curve across the low end of it . as he gaze , he see of a sudden a man steal forth from the wood into the open clearing . he walk with his head sink , his shoulder curve , and his knee bent , as one who strive hard to remain unseen . ten pace from the fringe of tree he glance around , and wave his hand he crouch down , and be lose to sight among a belt of . after him there come a second man , and after him a third , a fourth , and a fifth steal across the narrow open space and dart into the shelter of the brushwood . count of these dark figure flit across the line of the moonlight . many bear huge burden upon their back , though what it be that they carry he could not tell at the distance . out of the one wood and into the other they pass , all with the same crouch , furtive gait , until the black bristle of tree have swallow up the last of them . for a moment stand in the window , still stare down at the silent forest , uncertain as to what he should think of these midnight walker . then he bethink him that there be one beside him who be fit to judge on such a matter . his finger have scarce rest upon 's shoulder ere the bowman be on his foot , with his hand outstretch to his sword . " ? " he cry . " ! petit . by my hilt ! i think there have be a camisade . what then , gar . ? " " come hither by the window , , " say . " i have see man pass from yonder shaw across the glade , and nigh every man of them have a great burden on his back . what think you of it ? " " i think nothing of it , ! there be as many masterless folk in this country as there be rabbit on , and there be many who show their face by night but would dance in a hempen collar if they stir forth in the day . on all the french march be drove of outcast , reiver , spoiler , and , of whom i judge that these be some , though i marvel that they should dare to come so nigh to the castle of the seneschal . all seem very quiet now , " he add , peer out of the window . " they be in the further wood , " say . " and there they may bide . back to rest , petit ; for , by my hilt ! each day now will bring its own work . yet it would be well to shoot the bolt in yonder door when one be in strange quarter . so ! " he throw himself down upon his pallet and in an instant be fast asleep . it might have be about three o'clock in the morning when be arouse from a troubled sleep by a low cry or exclamation . he listen , but , as he hear no more , he set it down as the challenge of the guard upon the wall , and drop off to sleep once more . a few minute later he be disturb by a gentle creak of his own door , as though some one be push cautiously against it , and immediately afterwards he hear the soft thud of cautious footstep upon the stair which lead to the room above , follow by a confused noise and a muffle groan . sit up on his couch with all his nerve in a tingle , uncertain whether these sound might come from a simple sick archer and visit leech whether they might have a more sinister meaning . but what danger could threaten them here in this strong castle , under the care of famous warrior , with high wall and a broad moat around them ? who be there that could injure them ? he have well-nigh persuade himself that his fear be a foolish fancy , when his eye fall upon that which send the blood cold to his heart and leave him gasp , with hand clutch at the counterpane . right in front of him be the broad window of the chamber , with the moon shine brightly through it . for an instant something have obscure the light , and now a head be bob up and down outside , the face look in at him , and swing slowly from one side of the window to the other . even in that dim light there could be no mistake those feature . draw , distorted and blood-stained , they be still those of the young who have sit so recently upon his own couch . with a cry of horror spring from his bed and rush to the casement , while the two archer , arouse by the sound , seize their weapon and stare about them in bewilderment . one glance be enough to show that his fear be but too true . foully murder , with a score of wound upon him and a rope round his neck , his poor friend have be cast from the upper window and swing slowly in the night wind , his body rasp against the wall and his disfigure face upon a level with the casement . " ! " cry , shake in every limb . " what have come upon us ? what devil 's deed be this ? " " here be flint and steel , " say stolidly . " the lamp , ! this moonshine soften a man 's heart . now we may use the eye which have give us . " " by my hilt ! " cry , as the yellow flame flicker up , " it be indeed young master , and i think that this seneschal be a black villain , who dare not face us in the day but would murther us in our sleep . by the twang of string ! if i do not soak a goose 's feather with his heart 's blood , it will be no fault of of the company . " " but , , think of the man whom i see , " say . " it may not be the seneschal . it may be that other have come into the castle . i must to ere it be too late . let me go , , for my place be by his side . " " one moment , gar . put that steel on the end of my . so ! i will put it first through the door ; for it be ill to come out when you can neither see nor guard yourself . now , , out sword and stand ready ! , by my hilt ! it be time that we be stir ! " as he speak , a sudden shouting break forth in the castle , with the scream of a woman and the rush of many foot . then come the sharp clink of clash steel , and a roar like that of an angry ! ! ! " the pull back the bolt of the door , and thrust out the headpiece at the end of the bow . a clash , the clatter of the upon the ground , and , ere the man who strike could heave up for another blow , the archer have pass his sword through his body . " on , , on ! " he cry ; and , break fiercely past two man who throw themselves in his way , he speed down the broad corridor in the direction of the shouting . a sharp turning , and then a second one , bring them to the head of a short stair , from which they look straight down upon the scene of the uproar . a square hall lie beneath them , from which open the door of the principal . this hall be as light as day , for torch burn in numerous sconce upon the wall , throw strange shadow from the tusked or antlered head which ornament them . at the very foot of the stair , close to the open door of their chamber , lie the seneschal and his wife : she with her head shear from her shoulder , he thrust through with a sharpen stake , which still protrude from either side of his body . three servant of the castle lie dead beside them , all tear and draggle , as though a pack of wolf have be upon them . in front of the central stand and , and , with the mad joy of battle gleam in their eye . their head be throw back , their lip compress , their blood-stained sword poise over their right shoulder , and their left foot throw out . three dead man lie huddle together in front of them : while a fourth , with the blood squirt from a sever vessel , lie back with knee , breathe in wheezy gasp . further pant together , like the wind in a stand a group of fierce , wild creature , and , gaunt , unshaven , with deep-set murderous eye and wild beast face . with their flash tooth , their bristle hair , their mad and , they seem to more like fiend from the pit than man of flesh and blood . even as he look , they break into a hoarse yell and dash once more upon the two knight , hurl themselves madly upon their ; clutch , scramble , biting , tearing , careless of wound if they could but drag the two soldier to earth . be throw down by the sheer weight of them , and with his thunderous war-cry be swing round his heavy sword to clear a space for him to rise , when the whistle of two long english arrow , and the rush of the squire and the two english archer down the stair , turn the tide of the combat . the assailant give back , the knight rush forward , and in a very few moment the hall be clear , and have hurl the last of the wild man down the steep step which lead from the end of it . " do not follow them , " cry . " we be lose if we scatter . for myself i care not a denier , though it be a poor thing to meet one 's end at the hand of such scum ; but i have my dear lady here , who must by no mean be risk . we have breathing-space now , and i would ask you , , what it be that you would counsel ? " " by ! " answer , " i can by no mean understand what have befall us , save that i have be wake up by your battle-cry , and , rush forth , find myself in the midst of this small bickering . and alas for the lady and the seneschal ! what dog be they who have do this bloody deed ? " " they be the , the man of the brushwood . they have the castle , though i know not how it have come to pass . look from this window into the bailey . " " by heaven ! " cry , " it be as bright as day with the torch . the gate stand open , and there be three thousand of them within the wall . see how they rush and scream and wave ! what be it that they thrust out through the postern door ? ! it be a man-at-arms , and they pluck him limb from limb like hound on a wolf . now another , and yet another . they hold the whole castle , for i see their face at the window . see , there be some with great bundle on their back . " " it be dry wood from the forest . they pile them against the wall and set them in a blaze . who be this who try to check them ? by ! it be the good priest who speak for them in the hall . he kneel , he pray , he implore ! what ! villain , would raise hand against those who have befriend you ? ah , the butcher have strike him ! he be down ! they stamp him under their foot ! they tear off his gown and wave it in the air ! see now , how the flame lick up the wall ! be there none leave to rally round us ? with a hundred man we might hold our own . " " oh , for my company ! " cry . " but where be , ? " " he be foully murder , my fair lord . " " the saint receive him ! may he rest in peace ! but here come some at last who may give us counsel , for amid these passage it be ill to stir without a guide . " as he speak , a french squire and the bohemian knight come rush down the step , the latter bleeding from a slash across his forehead . " all be lose ! " he cry . " the castle be take and on fire , the seneschal be slay , and there be nought leave for us . " " on the contrary , " quoth , " there be much leave to us , for there be a very honorable contention before us , and a fair lady for whom to give our life . there be many way in which a man might die , but none good than this . " " you can tell us , , " say to the french squire : " how come these man into the castle , and what succor can we count upon ? by ! if we come not quickly to some counsel we shall be burn like young rook in a nest . " the squire , a dark , slender stripling , speak firmly and quickly , as one who be train to swift action . " there be a passage under the earth into the castle , " say he , " and through it some of the make their way , cast open the gate for the other . they have have help from within the wall , and the man-at-arms be heavy with wine : they must have be slay in their bed , for these devil creep from room to room with soft step and ready knife . the be strike down with an axe as he rush before us from his . save only ourselves , i do not think that there be any left alive . " " what , then , would you counsel ? " " that we make for the keep . it be unused , save in time of war , and the key hang from my poor lord and master 's belt . " " there be two key there . " " it be the large . once there , we might hold the narrow stair ; and at least , as the wall be of a great thickness , it would be long ere they could burn them . could we but carry the lady across the bailey , all might be well with us . " " ; the lady have see something of the work of war , " say come forth , as white , as grave , and as unmoved as ever . " i would not be a hamper to you , my dear spouse and gallant friend . rest assure of this , that if all else fail i have always a safeguard a small poniard from her set me beyond the fear of these vile and blood-stained wretch . " " , " cry , " i have always love you ; and now , by our of ! i love you more than ever . do i not know that your hand will be as ready as your word i would myself turn my last blow upon you , ere you should fall into their hand . lead on , ! a new golden pyx will shine in the minster of if we come safely through with it . " the attention of the insurgent have be draw away from murder to plunder , and all over the castle might be hear their cry and whoop of delight as they drag forth the rich tapestry , the silver flagon , and the carve furniture . down in the courtyard wretch , their bare limb all mottle with , strut about with plume helmet upon their head , or with the 's silken gown gird round their loin and trail on the ground behind them . cask of choice wine have be roll out from the cellar , and starve peasant squat , goblet in hand , drain off vintage which have set aside for noble and royal guest . other , with slab of bacon and joint of dry meat upon the end of their pike , hold them up to the blaze or tear at them ravenously with their tooth . yet all order have not be lose amongst them , for some hundred of the well armed stand together in a silent group , lean upon their rude weapon and look up at the fire , which have spread so rapidly as to involve one whole side of the castle . already could hear the crackle and roar of the flame , while the air be heavy with heat and full of the pungent whiff of burn wood . under the guidance of the french squire the party pass down two narrow corridor . the first be empty , but at the head of the second stand a peasant sentry , who start off at the sight of them , yell loudly to his comrade . " stop him , or we be undo ! " cry , and have start to run , when 's great twang like a , and the man fall forward upon his face , with twitch limb and clutch finger . within five pace of where he lie a narrow and little-used door lead out into the bailey . from beyond it come such a of hoot and scream , horrible oath and yet more horrible laughter , that the stout heart might have shrink from cast down the frail barrier which face them . " make straight for the keep ! " say , in a sharp , stern whisper . " the two archer in front , the lady in the centre , a squire on either side , while we three knight shall bide behind and beat back those who press upon us . so ! now open the door , and have us in his holy keeping ! " for a few moment it seem that their object would be attain without danger , so swift and so silent have be their movement . they be half-way across the bailey ere the frantic , howl peasant make a movement to stop them . the few who throw themselves in their way be overpower or brush aside , while the pursuer be beat back by the ready weapon of the three cavalier . unscathed they fight their way to the door of the keep , and face round upon the swarm mob , while the squire thrust the great key into the lock . " ! " he cry , " it be the wrong key . " " the wrong key ! " " dolt , fool that i be ! this be the key of the castle gate ; the other open the keep . i must back for it ! " he turn , with some wild intention of retrace his step , but at the instant a great jagged rock , hurl by a brawny peasant , strike him full upon the ear , and he drop senseless to the ground . " this be key enough for me ! " quoth , pick up the huge stone , and hurl it against the door with all the strength of his enormous body . the lock shiver , the wood smash , the stone fly into five piece , but the iron clamp still hold the door in its position . bend down , he thrust his great finger under it , and with a heave raise the whole mass of wood and iron from its hinge . for a moment it totter and sway , and then , fall outward , bury him in its ruin , while his comrade rush into the dark archway which lead to safety . " up the step , ! " cry . " now round , friend , and beat them back ! " the mob of peasant have surge in upon their heel , but the two trusty blade in gleam upon that narrow stair , and four of their number drop upon the threshold . the other give back , and gather in a half circle round the open door , gnash their tooth and shake their clench hand at the defender . the body of the french squire have be drag out by them and hack to piece . three or four other have pull from under the door , when he suddenly bound to his foot , and clutch one in either hand dash them together with such force that they fall senseless across each other upon the ground . with a kick and a blow he free himself from two other who cling to him , and in a moment he be within the portal with his comrade . yet their position be a desperate one . the peasant from far and near have be assemble for this deed of vengeance , and not less than six thousand be within or around the wall of the of . ill armed and half starve , they be still desperate man , to whom danger have lose all fear : for what be death that they should shun it to cling to such a life as theirs ? the castle be theirs , and the roar flame be spurt through the window and flicker high above the turret on two side of the quadrangle . from either side they be sweep down from room to room and from bastion to bastion in the direction of the keep . face by an army , and gird in by fire , be six man and one woman ; but some of them be man so train to danger and so wise in war that even now the combat be less unequal than it seem . courage and resource be pen in by desperation and number , while the great yellow sheet of flame throw their lurid glare over the scene of death . " there be but space for two upon a step to give free play to our , " say . " do you stand with me , , upon the low . and will fight together this night . , i pray you to stand behind us with this young squire . the archer may go higher yet and shoot over our head . i would that we have our harness , . " " often have i hear my dear say that a knight should never , even when a guest , be part from it . yet it will be more honor to us if we come well out of it . we have a vantage , since we see them against the light and they can scarce see us . it seem to me that they muster for an onslaught . " " if we can but keep them in play , " say the bohemian , " it be likely that these flame may bring us succor if there be any true man in the country . " " bethink you , my fair lord , " say to , " that we have never injure these man , nor have we cause of quarrel against them . would it not be well , if but for the lady 's sake , to speak them fair and see if we may not come to honorable term with them ? " " not so , by ! " cry . " it do not accord with mine honor , nor shall it ever be say that i , a knight of , be ready to hold parley with man who have slay a fair lady and a holy priest . " " as well hold parley with a pack of ravening wolf , " say the french captain . " ! ! ! ! " as he thunder forth his war-cry , the who have be gather before the black arch of the gateway rush in madly in a desperate effort to carry the staircase . their leader be a small man , dark in the face , with his beard do up in two plait , and another large man , very bow in the shoulder , with a huge club stud with sharp nail in his hand . the first have not take three step ere an arrow from 's bow strike him full in the chest , and he fall cough and splutter across the threshold . the other rush onwards , and break between and he dash out the brain of the bohemian with a single blow of his clumsy weapon . with three sword through him he still struggle on , and have almost win his way through them ere he fall dead upon the stair . close at his heel come a hundred furious peasant , who fling themselves again and again against the five sword which confront them . it be cut and parry and stab as quick as eye could see or hand act . the door be pile with body , and the stone floor be slippery with blood . the deep shout of , the hard , hiss breath of the pressing multitude , the clatter of steel , the thud of fall body , and the scream of the stricken , make up such a medley as come often in after year to break upon 's sleep . slowly and sullenly at last the throng draw off , with many a fierce backward glance , while eleven of their number lie huddle in front of the stair which they have fail to win . " the dog have have enough , " say . " by ! there appear to be some very worthy and valiant person among them , " observe . " they be man from whom , have they be of good birth , much honor and advancement might be gain . even as it be , it be a great pleasure to have see them . but what be this that they be bring forward ? " " it be as i fear , " growl . " they will burn us out , since they can win their way past us . shoot straight and hard , archer ; for , by ! our good sword be of little use to us . " as he speak , a dozen man rush forward , each screen himself behind a huge fardel of brushwood . hurl their burden in one vast heap within the portal , they throw burn torch upon the top of it . the wood have be soak in oil , for in an instant it be ablaze , and a long , hiss , yellow flame lick over the head of the defender , and drive them further up to the first floor of the keep . they have scarce reach it , however , ere they find that the wooden joist and plank of the flooring be already on fire . dry and worm-eaten , a spark upon them become a smoulder , and a smoulder a blaze . a choke smoke fill the air , and the five could scarce grope their way to the staircase which lead up to the very summit of the square tower . be the scene which meet their eye from this eminence . beneath them on every side stretch the long sweep of peaceful country , roll plain , and tangled wood , all soften and mellow in the silver moonshine . no light , nor movement , nor any sign of human aid could be see , but far away the hoarse clangor of a heavy bell rise and fall upon the wintry air . beneath and around them blaze the huge fire , roar and crackle on every side of the bailey , and even as they look the two corner turret fall in with a deafen crash , and the whole castle be but a shapeless mass , spout flame and smoke from every window and embrasure . the great black tower upon which they stand rise like a last island of refuge amid this sea of fire but the ominous crackling and roaring below show that it would not be long ere it be engulf also in the common ruin . at their very foot be the square courtyard , crowd with the howl and dance peasant , their fierce face upturn , their clench hand wave , all drunk with bloodshed and with vengeance . a yell of execration and a scream of hideous laughter burst from the vast throng , as they see the face of the last survivor of their enemy peer down at them from the height of the keep . they still pile the brushwood round the base of the tower , and gambol hand in hand around the blaze , scream out the doggerel line which have long be the watchword of the : , , gens , et manger le . their thin , shrill voice rise high above the roar of the flame and the crash of the masonry , like the yelp of a pack of wolf who see their quarry before them and know that they have well-nigh run him down . " by my hilt ! " say to , " it be in my mind that we shall not see this journey . it be a great joy to me that i have place my feather-bed and other thing of price with that worthy woman at , who will now have the use of them . i have thirteen arrow yet , and if one of them fly , then , by the twang of string ! i shall deserve my doom . first at him who flaunt with my lady 's silken frock . clap in the clout , by ! though a hand's-breadth lower than i have mean . now for the rogue with the head upon his pike . ! to the inch , . when my eye be true , i be good at rover than at or . a good shoot for you also , ! the villain have fall forward into the fire . but i pray you , , to loose gently , and not to pluck with the , for it be a trick that have mar many a fine bowman . " whilst the two archer be keep up a brisk fire upon the mob beneath them , and his lady be consult with upon their desperate situation . " ' a strange end for one who have see so many stricken field , " say the french chieftain . " for me one death be as another , but it be the thought of my sweet lady which go to my heart . " " , , i fear it as little as you , " say she . " have i my dear wish , it would be that we should go together . " " well answer , fair lady ! " cry . " and very sure i be that my own sweet wife would have say the same . if the end be now come , i have have great good fortune in have live in time when so much glory be to be win , and in know so many valiant gentleman and knight . but why do you pluck my sleeve , ? " " if it please you , my fair lord , there be in this corner two great tube of iron , with many heavy ball , which may perchance be those bombard and shot of which i have hear . " " by ! it be true , " cry , stride across to the recess where the ungainly , , engine be stand . " bombard they be , and of good size . we may shoot down upon them . " " shoot with them , ? " cry in high disdain , for press danger be the great leveller of class . " how be a man to take aim with these fool 's toy , and how can he hope to do with them ? " " i will show you , " answer ; " for here be the great box of powder , and if you will raise it for me , , i will show you how it may be use . come hither , where the folk be thick round the fire . now , , crane neck and see what would have be deem an old wife 's tale when we first turn our face to the war . throw back the lid , , and drop the box into the fire ! " a deafen roar , a fluff of bluish light , and the great square tower rock and tremble from its very foundation , sway this way and that like a reed in the wind . amazed and dizzy , the defender , clutch at the crack parapet for support , see great stone , burn beam of wood , and mangle body hurtle past them through the air . when they stagger to their foot once more , the whole keep have settle down upon one side , so that they could scarce keep their footing upon the sloping platform . gaze over the edge , they look down upon the horrible destruction which have be cause by the explosion . for forty yard round the portal the ground be black with writhe , scream figure , who struggle up and hurl themselves down again , toss this way and that , sightless , scorch , with fire burst from their tatter clothing . beyond this circle of death their comrade , bewilder and amaze , cower away from this black tower and from these invincible man , who be most to be dread when hope be furthest from their heart . " a sally , , a sally ! " cry . " by ! they be in two mind , and a bold rush may turn them . " he draw his sword as he speak and dart down the wind stair , closely follow by his four comrade . ere he be at the first floor , however , he throw up his arm and stop . " ! " he say , " we be lose man ! " " what then ? " cry those behind him . " the wall have fall in , the stair be block , and the fire still rage below . by ! friend , we have fight a very honorable fight , and may say in all humbleness that we have do our , but i think that we may now go back to the and say our orison , for we have play our part in this world , and it be time that we make ready for another . " the narrow pass be block by huge stone litter in wild confusion over each other , with the blue choke smoke reek up through the crevice . the explosion have blow in the wall and cut off the only path by which they could descend . in , a hundred foot from earth , with a furnace rage under them and a ravening multitude all round who thirst for their blood , it seem indeed as though no man have ever come through such peril with their life . slowly they make their way back to the summit , but as they come out upon it the dart forward and catch her husband by the wrist . " , " say she , " hush and listen ! i have hear the voice of man all singing together in a strange tongue . " breathless they stand and silent , but no sound come up to them , save the roar of the flame and the clamor of their enemy . " it can be , lady , " say . " this night have over wrought you , and your sense play you false . what man be there in this country who would sing in a strange tongue ? " " ! " yell , leap suddenly into the air with wave hand and joyous face . " i think i hear it ere we go down , and now i hear it again . we be save , comrade ! by these ten , we be save ! it be the march song of the . ! " with upraise forefinger and slanting head , he stand listen . suddenly there come swell up a , rollick chorus from somewhere out of the darkness . never do choice or dainty ditty of or sound more sweetly in the ear than do the saxon to the six who strain their ear from the blaze keep : we will drink all together to the gray goose feather and the land where the gray goose fly . " , by my hilt ! " shout , " it be the dear old bow song of the company . here come two hundred as tight lad as ever twirl a shaft over their thumbnail . hark to the dog , how lustily they sing ! " near and clear , swell up out of the night , come the gay march lilt : what of the bow ? the bow be make in . of true wood , of yew wood , the wood of english bow ; for man who be free love the old yew-tree and the land where the yew tree grow . what of the man ? the man be breed in , the bowman , the yeoman , the lad of the dale and fall , here have to you and to you , to the heart that be true , and the land where the true heart dwell . " they sing very joyfully , " say , " as though they be go to a festival . " " it be their wont when there be work to be do . " " by ! " quoth , " it be in my mind that they come too late , for i can see how we be to come down from this tower . " " there they come , the heart of gold ! " cry . " see , they move out from the shadow . now they cross the meadow . they be on the further side of the moat . , ! , , , , ! would see a fair lady and two gallant knight do foully to death ? " " who be there ? " shout a deep voice from below . " who be this who speak with an english tongue ? " " it be i , old lad . it be of the company ; and here be your captain , , and four other , all lay out to be grill like an 's herring . " " curse me if i do not think that it be the style of speech of old , " say the voice , amid a buzz from the rank . " wherever there be knock go there be in the heart of it . but who be these rogue who block the path ? to your kennel , canaille ! what ! you dare look us in the eye ? out sword , lad , and give them the flat of them ! waste not your shaft upon such runagate knave . " there be little fight leave in the peasant , however , still daze by the explosion , amaze at their own loss and dishearten by the arrival of the disciplined archer . in a very few minute they be in full flight for their brushwood home , leave the morning sun to rise upon a blacken and blood-stained ruin , where it have leave the night before the magnificent castle of the of auvergne . already the white line in the east be deepen into pink as the archer gather round the keep and take counsel how to rescue the survivor . " have we a rope , " say , " there be one side which be not yet on fire , down which we might slip . " " but how to get a rope ? " " it be an old trick , " quoth . " ! , cast me up a rope , even as you do at in the war time . " the grizzled archer thus address take several length of rope from his comrade , and knot them firmly together , he stretch them out in the long shadow which the rise sun throw from the frown keep . then he fix the of his bow upon end and measure the long , thin , black line which it throw upon the turf . " a six-foot stave throw a shadow , " he mutter . " the keep throw a shadow of sixty pace . thirty pace of rope will be enow and to spare . another strand , ! now pull at the end that all may be safe . so ! it be ready for them . " " but how be they to reach it ? " ask the young archer beside him . " watch and see , young , " growl the old bowman . he take a long string from his pouch and fasten one end to an arrow . " all ready , ? " " ready , . " " close to your hand then . " with an easy pull he send the shaft flicker gently up , fall upon the stonework within a foot of where be stand . the other end be secure to the rope , so that in a minute a good strong cord be dangle from the only sound side of the blaze and shattered tower . the be lower with a noose draw fast under the arm , and the other five slide swiftly down , amid the cheer and joyous outcry of their rescuer . " where be ? " ask , as his foot touch ground . " he be in camp , near , two hour ' march from here , my fair lord , " say , the grizzled bowman who command the archer . " then we shall march thither , for i would fain have you all back at in time to be in the prince 's vanguard . " " my lord , " cry , joyfully , " here be our charger in the field , and i see your harness amid the plunder which these rogue have leave behind them . " " by ! you speak sooth , young squire , " say . " there be my horse and my lady 's jennet . the knave lead them from the stable , but flee without them . now , , it be great joy to me to have see one of whom i have often hear . yet we must leave you now , for i must be with the of ere your army cross the mountain . " " i have think that you be in with the valiant of . " " i have be there , but i come to to raise succor for him . i shall ride back , , with four thousand of the good lance of at my back , so that your prince may find he have a task which be worthy of him . be with you , friend , and may we meet again in good time ! " " i do not think , " say , as he stand by 's side look after the french knight and his lady , " that in all christendom you will meet with a more stout-hearted man or a fair and sweet dame . but your face be pale and sad , ! have you perchance meet with some hurt during the ruffle ? " " , my fair lord , i be but think of my friend , and how he sit upon my couch no later than . " shake his head sadly . " two brave squire have i lose , " say he . " i know not why the young shoot should be pluck , and an old weed leave standing , yet certes there must be some good reason , since have so plan it . do you not note , , that the do give us warn last night that danger be come upon us ? " " she do , my lord . " " by ! my mind misgive me as to what she see at . and yet i can think that any scottish or french rover could land in such force as to beleaguer the fortalice . call the company together , ; and let us on , for it will be shame to us if we be not at upon the tryst day . " the archer have spread themselves over the ruin , but a blast upon a bugle bring them all back to muster , with such booty as they could bear with them stuff into their pouch or sling over their shoulder . as they form into rank , each man drop silently into his place , run a questioning eye over them , and a smile of pleasure play over his face . tall and sinewy , and brown , clear-eyed , , with the stern and prompt bearing of experienced soldier , it would be hard indeed for a leader to seek for a following . here and there in the rank be old soldier of the french war , grizzled and lean , with fierce , pucker feature and shaggy , bristle brow . the most , however , be young and dandy archer , with fresh english face , their beard comb out , their hair curl from under their close steel , with gold or jewel earring gleam in their ear , while their baldric , their silken belt , and the chain which many of them wear round their thick brown neck , all speak of the brave time which they have have as free companion . each have a yew or hazel stave sling over his shoulder , plain and serviceable with the old man , but gaudily paint and carve at either end with the other . steel cap , mail brigandine , white surcoat with the red lion of , and sword or battle-axe swing from their belt , complete this equipment , while in some case the murderous or five-foot mallet be hang across the , be fasten to their leathern by a hook in the centre of the handle . 's heart beat high as he look upon their free bearing and fearless face . for two hour they march through forest and marshland , along the leave bank of the river ; ride behind his company , with at his right hand , and , the old master bowman , walk by his left stirrup . ere they have reach their journey 's end the knight have learn all that he would know of his man , their doing and their intention . once , as they march , they see upon the further bank of the river a body of french man-at-arms , ride very swiftly in the direction of . " it be the of , with his following , " say , shade his eye with his hand . " have he be on this side of the water he might have attempt something upon us . " " i think that it would be well that we should cross , " say . " it be pity to balk this worthy seneschal , should he desire to try some small feat of arm . " " nay , there be no ford near than , " answer the old archer . " he be on his way to , and short will be the shrift of any who come into his hand , for he be a man of short speech . it be he and the of who hang , of the company , last ; for which , by the black rood of ! they shall hang themselves , if ever they come into our power . but here be our comrade , , and here be our camp . " as he speak , the forest pathway along which they march open out into a green glade , which slope down towards the river . high , leafless tree gird it in on three side , with a thick undergrowth of holly between their trunk . at the farther end of this forest clearing there stand forty or fifty hut , build very neatly from wood and clay , with the blue smoke curl out from the roof . a dozen tethered horse and mule graze around the encampment , while a number of archer lounge about : some shooting at mark , while other build up great wooden fire in the open , and hang their cooking kettle above them . at the sight of their return comrade there be a shout of welcome , and a horseman , who have be exercise his charger behind the camp , come canter down to them . he be a dapper , brisk man , very richly clad , with a round , clean-shaven face , and very bright black eye , which dance and sparkle with excitement . " ! " he cry . " , at last ! by my soul we have await you this month past . right welcome , ! you have have my letter ? " " it be that which bring me here , " say . " but indeed , , it be a great wonder to me that you do not yourself lead these bowman , for surely they could have find no good leader ? " " none , none , by the of ! " he cry , speak in the strange , thick gascon speech which turn every into a . " but you know what these islander of yours are , . they will not be lead by any save their own blood and race . there be no persuade them . not even i , of , master of the high justice , the middle and the low , could gain their favor . they must needs hold a council and put their two hundred thick head together , and then there come this fellow and another , as their spokesman , to say that they will disband unless an englishman of good name be set over them . there be many of them , as i understand , who come from some great forest which lie in , or can lay my tongue to the name . your dwelling be in those part , and so their thought turn to you as their leader . but we have hope that you would bring a hundred man with you . " " they be already at , where we shall join them , " say . " but let the man break their fast , and we shall then take counsel what to do . " " come into my hut , " say . " it be but poor fare that i can lay before , cheese , wine , and your squire and yourself will doubtless excuse it . this be my house where the pennon fly before the small residence to contain the of . " sit silent and distrait at his meal , while hearken to the clatter tongue of the gascon , and to his talk of the glory of his own estate , his success in love , and his triumph in war . " and now that you be here , , " he say at last , " i have many fine venture all ready for us . i have hear that be of no great strength , and that there be two hundred thousand crown in the castle . at also there be a cobbler who be in my pay , and who will throw us a rope any dark night from his house by the town wall . i promise you that you shall thrust your arm among good silver piece ere the night be moonless again ; for on every hand of us be fair woman , rich wine , and good plunder , as much as heart could wish . " " i have other plan , " answer curtly ; " for i have come hither to lead these bowman to the help of the prince , our master , who may have sore need of them ere he set upon the throne of . it be my purpose to start this very day for upon the , where he have now pitch his camp . " the face of the darken , and his eye flash with resentment . " for me , " he say , " i care little for this war , and i find the life which i lead a very joyous and pleasant one . i will not go to . " " , think again , , " say gently ; " for you have ever have the name of a true and loyal knight . surely you will not hold back now when your master have need of you . " " i will not go to , " the other shout . " but your oath of fealty ? " " i say that i will not go . " " then , , i must lead the company without you . " " if they will follow , " cry the with a sneer . " these be not hire slave , but free companion , who will do nothing save by their own good will . in very sooth , my , they be ill man to trifle with , and it be easy to pluck a bone from a hungry bear than to lead a bowman out of a land of plenty and of pleasure . " " then i pray you to gather them together , " say , " and i will tell them what be in my mind ; for if i be their leader they must to , and if i be not then i know not what i be do in auvergne . have my horse ready , ; for , by ! come what may , i must be upon the homeward road ere . " a blast upon the bugle summon the bowman to counsel , and they gather in little knot and group around a great fallen tree which lie athwart the glade . spring lightly upon the trunk , and stand with blink eye and firm lip look down at the ring of upturn warlike face . " they tell me , bowman , " say he , " that have grow so fond of ease and plunder and high living that be not to be move from this pleasant country . but , by ! i will believe no such thing of you , for i can readily see that you be all very valiant man , who would scorn to live here in peace when your prince have so great a venture before him . have choose me as a leader , and a leader i will be if come with me to ; and i vow to you that my pennon of the five rose shall , if give me strength and life , be ever where there be most honor to be gain . but if it be your wish to loll and loiter in these glade , barter glory and renown for vile gold and ill-gotten rich , then must find another leader ; for i have live in honor , and in honor i trust that i shall die . if there be forest man or man amongst , i call upon them to say whether they will follow the banner of . " " here be a man for you ! " cry a young bowman with a sprig of evergreen set in his helmet . " and a lad from ! " shout another . " and from ! " " and from ! " " and from ! " " and a little one from ! " shout a fellow who sprawl beneath a tree . " by my hilt ! lad , " cry , jump upon the fall trunk , " i think that we could not look the girl in the eye if we let the prince cross the mountain and do not pull string to clear a path for him . it be very well in time of peace to lead such a life as we have have together , but now the be in the wind once more , and , by these ten ! if he go alone , old will walk beside it . " these word from a man as popular as decide many of the waverer , and a shout of approval burst from his audience . " far be it from me , " say suavely , " to persuade you against this worthy archer , or against ; yet we have be together in many venture , and perchance it may not be amiss if i say to you what i think upon the matter . " " peace for the little ! " cry the archer . " let every man have his word . shoot straight for the mark , lad , and fair play for all . " " bethink you , then , " say , " that you go under a hard rule , with neither freedom nor for what ? for sixpence a day , at the most ; while now you may walk across the country and stretch out either hand to gather in whatever you have a mind for . what do we not hear of our comrade who have go with to ? in one night they have hold to ransom six hundred of the rich nobleman of . they camp before a great city , and the base burgher come forth with the key , and then they make great spoil ; or , if it please them good , they take so many of silver as a composition ; and so they journey on from state to state , rich and free and fear by all . now , be not that the proper life for a soldier ? " " the proper life for a robber ! " roar , in his thundering voice . " and yet there be much in what the say , " say a swarthy fellow in a doublet ; " and i for one would rather prosper in than starve in . " " you be always a cur and a traitor , , " cry . " by my hilt ! if you will stand forth and draw your sword i will warrant you that you will see neither one nor the other . " " , , " say , " we can mend the matter by broil . , i think that what you have say do you little honor , and if my word aggrieve you i be ever ready to go deep into the matter with you . but you shall have such man as will follow you , and you may go where you will , so that you come not with us . let all who love their prince and country stand fast , while those who think more of a well-lined purse step forth upon the farther side . " thirteen bowman , with hung head and sheepish face , step forward with and range themselves behind . amid the and of their comrade , they march off together to the 's hut , while the main body break up their meeting and set cheerily to work pack their possession , furbish their weapon , and prepare for the march which lie before them . over the and the , through the vast quagmire of armagnac , past the , and so down the long valley of the , there be many a long league to be cross ere they could join themselves to that dark war-cloud which be drift slowly southwards to the line of the snowy peak , beyond which the banner of have never yet be see . the whole vast plain of and of be an arid and profitless expanse in winter save where the and her tributary , the , the and the , run down to the sea of . of the the jagged line of mountain which fringe the send out long granite claw , run down into the lowland and divide them into " " or stretch of valley . hillock grow into hill , and hill into mountain , each range overlie its neighbor , until they soar up in the giant chain which raise its spotless and untread peak , white and dazzling , against the pale blue wintry sky . a quiet land be land where the , with his flat , his red sash and his hempen sandal , till his scanty farm or drive his lean flock to their pasture . it be the country of the wolf and the , of the brown bear and the , a land of bare rock and of rush water . yet here it be that the will of a great prince have now assemble a gallant army ; so that from the to the pass of the barren valley and wind-swept waste be populous with soldier and loud with the shouting of order and the neigh of horse . for the banner of war have be fling to the wind once more , and over those glisten peak be the highway along which point in an age when man have choose her as their guide . and now all be ready for the enterprise . from to the country be mottle with the white tent of , and , all eager for the advance . from all side the free companion have troop in , until not less than twelve thousand of these veteran troop be canton along the frontier of . from have arrive the prince 's brother , the of , with four hundred knight in his train and a strong company of archer . above all , an heir to the throne have be bear in , and the prince might leave his spouse with an easy mind , for all be well with mother and with child . the key of the mountain pass still lay in the hand of the shifty and ignoble of , who have chaffer and bargain both with the and with the spanish , take money from the one side to hold them open and from the other to keep them seal . the mallet hand of , however , have shatter all the scheme and wile of the plotter . neither entreaty nor courtly remonstrance come from the english prince ; but pass silently over the border with his company , and the blaze wall of the two city of and warn the unfaithful monarch that there be other metal besides gold , and that he be deal with a man to whom it be unsafe to lie . his price be pay , his objection silence , and the mountain gorge lie open to the invader . from the feast of the there be muster and mass , until , in the first week of day after the join the word be give for a general advance through the defile of . at five in the cold winter 's morning the bugle be blow in the hamlet of , and by six 's company , three hundred strong , be on their way for the defile , push swiftly in the dim light up the steep curve road ; for it be the prince 's order that they should be the first to pass through , and that they should remain on guard at the further end until the whole army have emerge from the mountain . day be already break in the east , and the summit of the great peak have turn rosy red , while the valley still lie in the shadow , when they find themselves with the cliff on either hand and the long , rugged pass stretch away before them . ride his great black war-horse at the head of his archer , dress in full armor , with bear his banner behind him , while at his carry his blazon shield and his ashen spear . a proud and happy man be the knight , and many a time he turn in his saddle to look at the long column of bowman who swing swiftly along behind him . " by ! , " say he , " this pass be a very perilous place , and i would that the of have hold it against us , for it would have be a very honorable venture have it fall to us to win a passage . i have hear the minstrel sing of one who be slay by the infidel in these very part . " " if it please you , my fair lord , " say , " i know something of these part , for i have twice serve a term with the of . there be a hospice of monk yonder , where you may see the roof among the tree , and there it be that be slay . the village upon the left be , and i know a house therein where the right wine of be to be buy , if it would please you to quaff a morning cup . " " there be smoke yonder upon the right . " " that be a village name , and i know a hostel there also where the wine be of the good . it be say that the inn-keeper have a bury treasure , and i doubt not , my fair lord , that if you grant me leave i could prevail upon him to tell us where he have hide it . " " , nay , , " say curtly , " i pray you to forget these free companion trick . ! , i see that you stare about you , and in good sooth these mountain must seem wondrous indeed to one who have but see or the hill . " the break and rugged road have wind along the crest of low hill , with wooded ridge on either side of it over which peep the lofty mountain , the distant of the and the vast , which towered high above them and cast its black shadow from leave to right across the valley . from where they now stand they could look forward down a long vista of beech wood and jagged wilderness , all white with snow , to where the pass open out upon the upland beyond . behind them they could still catch a glimpse of the gray plain of , and could see her river gleam like coil of silver in the sunshine . as far as eye could see from among the rocky gorge and the bristle of the pine wood there come the quick twinkle and glitter of steel , while the wind bring with it sudden distant burst of martial music from the great host which roll by every road and towards the narrow pass of . on the cliff on either side might also be see the flash of arm and the wave of pennon where the force of look down upon the army of stranger who pass through their territory . " by ! " say , blink up at them , " i think that we have much to hope for from these cavalier , for they cluster very thickly upon our flank . pass word to the man , , that they unsling their bow , for i have no doubt that there be some very worthy gentleman yonder who may give us some opportunity for honorable advancement . " " i hear that the prince have the of as hostage , " say , " and it be say that he have swear to put him to death if there be any attack upon us . " " it be not so that war be make when good first turn his hand to it , " say sadly . " ah ! , i fear that you will never live to see such thing , for the mind of man be more set upon money and gain than of old . by ! it be a noble sight when two great army would draw together upon a certain day , and all who have a vow would ride forth to discharge themselves of it . what noble have i not see , and even in an humble way have a part in , when cavalier would run a course for the easing of their soul and for the love of their lady ! never a bad word have i for the french , for , though i have ride twenty time up to their array , i have never yet fail to find some very gentle and worthy knight or squire who be willing to do what he might to enable me to attempt some small feat of arm . then , when all cavalier have be satisfy , the two army would come to , and fight right merrily until one or other have the vantage . by ! it be not our wont in those day to pay gold for the opening of pass , nor would we hold a king as hostage lest his people come to thrust with us . in good sooth , if the war be to be carry out in such a fashion , then it be grief to me that i ever come away from , for i would not have leave my sweet lady have i not think that there be deed of arm to be do . " " but surely , my fair lord , " say , " you have do some great feat of arm since we leave the . " " i can call any to mind , " answer . " there be the taking of the sea-rover , and the holding of the keep against the . " " , nay , " say the knight , " these be not feat of arm , but mere wayside venture and the chance of travel . by ! if it be not that these hill be for , i would ride to these cavalier of and see if there be not some among them who would help me to take this patch from mine eye . it be a sad sight to see this very fine pass , which my own company here could hold against an army , and yet to ride through it with as little profit as though it be the lane from my kennel to the avon . " all morning ride in a very , with his company tramp behind him . it be a toilsome march over break ground and through snow , which come often as high as the knee , yet ere the sun have begin to sink they have reach the spot where the gorge open out on to the upland of , and could see the tower of jut up against the southern . here the company be quarter in a scattered mountain hamlet , and spend the day look down upon the swarm army which pour with gleam of spear and flaunt of standard through the narrow pass . " , gar . , " say , seat himself upon a boulder by his side . " this be indeed a fine sight upon which it be good to look , and a man might go far ere he would see so many brave man and fine horse . by my hilt ! our little lord be wroth because we have come peacefully through the pass , but i will warrant him that we have fighting enow ere we turn our face northward again . it be say that there be thousand man behind the of , with and all the good lance of , who have swear to shed their heart 's blood ere this come again to the throne . " " yet our own army be a great one , " say . " nay , there be but thousand man . have persuade the prince to leave many behind , and indeed i think that he be right , for there be little food and less water in these part for which we be bind . a man without his meat or a horse without his fodder be like a wet , fit for little . but voila , petit , here come and his company , and there be many a pensil and banderole among yonder squadron which show that the good blood of be ride under his banner . " whilst have be speak , a strong column of archer have defile through the pass beneath them . they be follow by a who hold high the scarlet wedge upon a silver field which proclaim the presence of the famous warrior . he ride himself within a of his standard , clad from neck to foot in steel , but drape in the long linen gown or which be destine to be the cause of his death . his plume helmet be carry behind him by his , and his head be cover by a small purple cap , from under which his snow-white hair curl downwards to his shoulder . with his long nose and his single gleam eye , which shine brightly from under a thick tuft of grizzled brow , he seem to to have something of the look of some fierce old bird of prey . for a moment he smile , as his eye light upon the banner of the five rose wave from the hamlet ; but his course lie for , and he ride on after the archer . close at his heel come sixteen squire , all choose from the high family , and behind them ride twelve hundred english knight , with gleam of steel and toss of plume , their harness jingle , their long straight sword clank against their , and the beat of their charger ' hoof like the low deep roar of the sea upon the shore . behind them march six hundred and archer , bear the badge of the , follow by the famous himself , with the four valiant squire , of , of , of , and of , who have all win such glory at . two hundred cavalry ride behind the standard , while close at their heel come the of with a glitter train , herald with the royal arm ride three deep upon cream-colored charger in front of him . on either side of the young prince ride the two seneschal of , and , the one bearing the banner of the province and the other that of . away behind him as far as eye could reach roll the , unbroken river of after rank and column after column , with wave of plume , glitter of arm , toss of guidon , and flash and flutter of countless armorial device . all day look down upon the change scene , and all day the old bowman stand by his elbow , point out the crest of famous warrior and the arm of noble house . here be the gold mullet of the , the sable and ermine of the , the scarlet bar of the , the gold and blue of the , the of the , the annulet of the , the silver pinion of the , the crosse of the , the bloody chevron of the , the red and silver of the , the sword of the , the of the , the crescent of the , and the wolf and dagger of the . so through the sunny winter day the chivalry of pour down through the dark pass of to the plain of . it be on a that the of 's division pass safely through the . on the there be a bitter frost , and the ground ring like iron beneath the foot of the horse ; yet ere even the prince himself , with the main battle of his army , have pass the gorge and unite with his vanguard at . with him ride the of , the hostage king of , and the fierce of , whose pale blue eye gleam with a sinister light as they rest once more upon the distant peak of the land which have disown him . under the royal banner ride many a bold gascon baron and many a hot-blooded islander . here be the high steward of , of , of , of , of , of , of , and of , with the banner and muster of their province . here also be the valiant of , with his garter over his greave , , second cousin to , and a long column of welsh footman who march under the red banner of . from dawn to sundown the long train wound through the pass , their breath reek up upon the frosty air like the steam from a cauldron . the weather be less keen upon the , and the rear-guard make good their passage , with the bombard and the . free companion and gascon make up this portion of the army to the number of ten thousand man . the fierce , with his yellow mane , and the rugged , with their war-hardened and veteran company of english bowman , head the long column ; while behind them come the turbulent band of the of , , one-eyed , , nuit and other whose very name seem to smack of hard hand and ruthless deed . with them also be the pick of the gascon old , his nephew , brood and scowl over his wrong , the giant , the , pink of knighthood , the sprightly , the red-bearded , and a long train of needy and grasping border noble , with long pedigree and short purse , who have come down from their stronghold , all hunger for the spoil and the ransom of . by the morning the whole army be encamp in the of , and the prince have call his council to meet him in the old palace of the ancient city of . whilst the council be sit in the , have encamp in a neighboring valley , close to the company of nuit and of , be amuse themselves with sword-play , wrestle , and shoot at the shield , which they have place upon the hillside to serve them as butt . the young archer , with their coat of mail throw aside , their brown or flaxen hair toss in the wind , and their jerkin turn back to give free play to their brawny chest and arm , stand in line , each loosing his shaft in turn , while , , , and of the elder lounge up and down with critical eye , and a word of rough praise or of curt censure for the marksman . behind stand knot of and from the company of and of nuit , lean upon their unsightly weapon and watch the practice of the englishman . " a good shot , , a good shot ! " say old to a young bowman , who stand with his bow in his left hand , gaze with parted lip after his fly shaft . " you see , she find the ring , as i know she would from the moment that your string twang . " " loose it easy , steady , and yet sharp , " say . " by my hilt ! gar . , it be very well when you do but shoot at a shield , but when there be a man behind the shield , and he ride at you with wave of sword and glint of eye from behind his vizor , you may find him a less easy mark . " " it be a mark that i have find before now , " answer the young bowman . " and shall again , , i doubt not . but ! , who be this who hold his bow like a ? " " it be , of . do not wink with one eye and look with the other , , and do not hop and dance after you shoot , with your tongue out , for that will not speed it upon its way . stand straight and firm , as make you . move not the bow arm , and steady with the drawing hand ! " " ' faith , " say , " i be a spearman myself , and be more fit for than for such work as this . yet i have spend my day among bowman , and i have see many a brave shaft speed . i will not say but that we have some good marksman here , and that this company would be account a fine body of archer at any time or place . yet i do not see any man who bend so strong a bow or shoot as true a shaft as those whom i have know . " " you say sooth , " say , turn his seam and grizzle face upon the man-at-arms . " see yonder , " he add , point to a bombard which lie within the camp : " there be what have do to good , with its filthy soot and foolish roar mouth . i wonder that a true knight , like our prince , should carry such a scurvy thing in his train . , thou red-headed , how oft must i tell not to shoot straight with a blow across the mark ? " " by these ten ! there be some fine bowman at the of , " say . " i well remember that , on occasion of an outfall , a raise his arm over his mantlet , and shake it at us , a hundred pace from our line . there be twenty who loose shaft at him , and when the man be afterwards slay it be find that he have take eighteen through his forearm . " " and i can call to mind , " remark , " that when the great cog ' , ' which the have take from us , be moor two hundred pace from the shore , two archer , little and , in four shot each cut every strand of her hempen , so that she well-nigh come upon the rock . " " good shooting , ' faith rare shooting ! " say . " but i have see you , , and you , , and one or two other who be still with us , shoot as well as the good . be it not you , , who take the fat ox at butt against the pick of town ? " a sunburnt and black-eyed have stand near the old archer , lean upon a large crossbow and listen to their talk , which have be carry on in that hybrid camp dialect which both nation could understand . he be a squat , bull-necked man , clad in the iron helmet , mail tunic , and woollen of his class . a jacket with hang sleeve , slash with velvet at the neck and wrist , show that he be a man of some consideration , an , or of his company . " i can think , " say he , " why you should be so fond of your six-foot stick . if it amuse you to bend it , well and good ; but why should i strain and pull , when my little will do all for me , and good than i can do it for myself ? " " i have see good shooting with the prod and with the latch , " say , " but , by my hilt ! , with all respect to you and to your bow , i think that be but a woman 's weapon , which a woman can point and loose as easily as a man . " " i know not about that , " answer the , " but this i know , that though i have serve for fourteen year , i have never yet see an englishman do aught with the which i could not do good with my arbalest . by the three king ! i would even go further , and say that i have do thing with my arbalest which no englishman could do with his . " " well say , gar . , " cry . " a good cock have ever a brave call . now , i have shoot little of late , but there be here who will try a round with you for the honor of the company . " " and i will lay a gallon of wine upon the , " say , " though i have rather , for my own drinking , that it be a quart of ale . " " i take both your challenge and your wager , " say the man of , throw off his jacket and glance keenly about him with his black , twinkle eye . " i can see any fitting mark , for i care not to waste a bolt upon these shield , which a drunken boor could not miss at a village . " " this be a perilous man , " whisper an english man-at-arms , pluck at 's sleeve . " he be the good marksman of all the crossbow company and it be he who bring down the at . i fear that your man will come by little honor with him . " " yet i have see shoot these twenty year , and i will not flinch from it . how say you , old , will you not have a flight shot or two with this ? " " tut , tut , , " say the old bowman . " my day be past , and it be for the young one to hold what we have gain . i take it unkindly of , , that thou shouldst call all eye thus upon a break bowman who could once shoot a fair shaft . let me feel that bow , ! it be a scotch bow , i see , for the upper nock be without and the low within . by the black rood ! it be a good piece of yew , well nock , well string , well wax , and very joyful to the feel . i think even now that i might hit any large and goodly mark with a bow like this . turn quiver to me , . i love an ash arrow pierce with for a rove shaft . " " by my hilt ! and so do i , " cry . " these three shaft be such . " " so i see , comrade . it have be my wont to choose a saddle-backed feather for a dead shaft , and a for a smooth flier . i will take the two of them . ah ! , lad , the eye grow dim and the hand less firm as the year pass . " " come then , be you not ready ? " say the , who have watch with impatience the slow and methodic movement of his antagonist . " i will venture a rover with you , or try or , " say old . " to my mind the be a good weapon than the arbalest , but it may be ill for me to prove it . " " so i think , " quoth the other with a sneer . he draw his from his girdle , and fix it to the windlass , he draw back the powerful double cord until it have click into the catch . then from his quiver he draw a short , thick quarrel , which he place with the utmost care upon the groove . word have spread of what be go forward , and the rival be already surround , not only by the english archer of the company , but by hundred of and man-at-arms from the band of and nuit , to the latter of which the belong . " there be a mark yonder on the hill , " say he ; " mayhap you can discern it . " " i see something , " answer , shade his eye with his hand ; " but it be a very long shoot . " " a fair fair shoot ! stand aside , , lest you find a bolt through your gizzard . now , comrade , i take no flight shot , and i give you the vantage of watch my shaft . " as he speak he raise his arbalest to his shoulder and be about to pull the trigger , when a large gray stork flap heavily into view skim over the brow of the hill , and then soar up into the air to pass the valley . its shrill and piercing cry draw all eye upon it , and , as it come near , a dark spot which circle above it resolve itself into a peregrine falcon , which hover over its head , poise itself from time to time , and watch its chance of close with its clumsy quarry . near and near come the two bird , all absorb in their own contest , the stork wheel upwards , the hawk still flutter above it , until they be not a hundred pace from the camp . the raise his weapon to the sky , and there come the short , deep twang of his powerful string . his bolt strike the stork just where its wing meet the body , and the bird whirl aloft in a last convulsive flutter before fall wounded and flap to the earth . a roar of applause burst from the ; but at the instant that the bolt strike its mark old , who have stand listlessly with arrow on string , bend his bow and speed a shaft through the body of the falcon . whip the other from his belt , he send it skim some few foot from the earth with so true an aim that it strike and transfix the stork for the second time ere it could reach the ground . a shout of delight burst from the archer at the sight of this double feat , and , dancing with joy , throw his arm round the old marksman and embrace him with such vigor that their mail tunic clang again . " ah ! , " he cry , " you shall have a stoup with me for this ! what then , old dog , would not the hawk please , but thou must have the stork as well . oh , to my heart again ! " " it be a pretty piece of yew , and well string , " say with a twinkle in his deep-set gray eye . " even an old break bowman might find the clout with a bow like this . " " you have do very well , " remark the in a surly voice . " but it seem to me that you have not yet show yourself to be a good marksman than i , for i have strike that at which i aim , and , by the three king ! no man can do more . " " it would ill beseem me to claim to be a good marksman , " answer , " for i have hear great thing of your skill . i do but wish to show that the could do that which an arbalest could not do , for you could not with your have your string ready to speed another shaft ere the bird drop to the earth . " " in that you have vantage , " say the crossbowman . " by ! it be now my turn to show you where my weapon have the good of you . i pray you to draw a flight shaft with all your strength down the valley , that we may see the length of your shoot . " " that be a very strong prod of yours , " say , shake his grizzled head as he glance at the thick arch and powerful string of his rival 's arbalest . " i have little doubt that you can overshoot me , and yet i have see bowman who could send a arrow further than you could speed a quarrel . " " so i have hear , " remark the ; " and yet it be a strange thing that these wondrous bowman be never where i chance to be . pace out the distance with a wand at every five score , and do you , , stand at the fifth wand to carry back my bolt to me . " a line be measure down the valley , and , draw an arrow to the very head , send it whistle over the row of wand . " bravely draw ! a rare shoot ! " shout the bystander . " it be well up to the fourth mark . " " by my hilt ! it be over it , " cry . " i can see where they have stoop to gather up the shaft . " " we shall hear anon , " say quietly , and presently a young archer come run to say that the arrow have fall twenty pace beyond the fourth wand . " four hundred pace and a score , " cry . " ' faith , it be a very long flight . yet wood and steel may do more than flesh and blood . " the step forward with a smile of conscious triumph , and loose the cord of his weapon . a shout burst from his comrade as they watch the swift and lofty flight of the heavy bolt . " over the fourth ! " groan . " by my hilt ! i think that it be well up to the fifth . " " it be over the fifth ! " cry a gascon loudly , and a comrade come run with wave arm to say that the bolt have pitch eight pace beyond the mark of the five hundred . " which weapon have the vantage now ? " cry the , strut proudly about with shoulder arbalest , amid the applause of his companion . " you can overshoot me , " say gently . " or any other man who ever bend a , " cry his victorious adversary . " nay , not so fast , " say a huge archer , whose mighty shoulder and red head towered high above the throng of his comrade . " i must have a word with you ere you crow so loudly . where be my little popper ? by sainted of ! it will be a strange thing if i can outshoot that thing of thine , which to my eye be more like a than a bow . will you try another flight , or do you stand by your last ? " " five hundred and eight pace will serve my turn , " answer the , look askance at this new opponent . " tut , , " whisper , " you never be a marksman . why must you thrust your spoon into this dish ? " " easy and slow , . there be very many thing which i can do , but there be also one or two which i have the trick of . it be in my mind that i can beat this shoot , if my bow will but hold together . " " go on , old babe of the wood ! " " have at it , ! " cry the archer laugh . " by my soul ! you may grin , " cry . " but i learn how to make the long shoot from old of . " he take up a great black bow , as he speak , and sit down upon the ground he place his two foot on either end of the stave . with an arrow fit , he then pull the string towards him with both hand until the head of the shaft be level with the wood . the great bow creak and groan and the cord vibrate with the tension . " who be this who stand in the way of my shoot ? " say he , crane up his neck from the ground . " he stand on the further side of my mark , " answer the , " so he have little to fear from you . " " well , the saint assoil him ! " cry . " though i think he be to be scathe . " as he speak he raise his two foot , with the upon their sole , and his cord twang with a deep rich hum which might be hear across the valley . the measurer in the distance fall flat upon his face , and then jump up again , he begin to run in the opposite direction . " well shot , old lad ! it be indeed over his head , " cry the bowman . " ! " exclaim the , " who ever see such a shoot ? " " it be but a trick , " quoth . " many a time have i win a gallon of ale by cover a mile in three flight down . " " it fall a hundred and thirty pace beyond the fifth mark , " shout an archer in the distance . " six hundred and thirty pace ! ! but that be a shoot ! and yet it say nothing for your weapon , , for it be by turn yourself into a crossbow that you do it . " " by my hilt ! there be truth in that , " cry . " and now , friend , i will myself show you a vantage of the . i pray you to speed a bolt against yonder shield with all your force . it be an inch of elm with bull 's hide over it . " " i scarce shot as many shaft at , " growl the man of ; " though i find a good mark there than a cantle of bull 's hide . but what be this , englishman ? the shield hang not one hundred pace from me , and a blind man could strike it . " he screw up his string to the furthest pitch , and shoot his quarrel at the dangling shield . , who have draw an arrow from his quiver , carefully grease the head of it , and speed it at the same mark . " run , , " quoth he , " and fetch me the shield . " long be the face of the englishman and broad the laugh of the as the heavy mantlet be carry towards them , for there in the centre be the thick bolt drive deeply into the wood , while there be neither sign nor trace of the shaft . " by the three king ! " cry the , " this time at least there be no gainsay which be the good weapon , or which the true hand that hold it . you have miss the shield , englishman . " " tarry a bit ! tarry a bit , gar . ! " quoth , and turn round the shield he show a round clear hole in the wood at the back of it . " my shaft have pass through it , , and i trow the one which go through be more to be fear than that which bide on the way . " the stamp his foot with mortification , and be about to make some angry reply , when come ride up to the crowd of archer . " will be here anon , " say he , " and it be his wish to speak with the company . " in an instant order and method take the place of general confusion . bow , steel cap , and jack be catch up from the grass . a long cordon clear the camp of all stranger , while the main body fall into four line with and in front and on either flank . so they stand , silent and motionless , when their leader come ride towards them , his face shine and his whole small figure swell with the news which he bear . " great honor have be do to us , man , " cry he : " for , of all the army , the prince have choose us out that we should ride onwards into the land of to spy upon our enemy . yet , as there be many of us , and as the service may not be to the liking of all , i pray that those will step forward from the rank who have the will to follow me . " there be a rustle among the bowman , but when look up at them no man stand forward from his fellow , but the four line of man stretch unbroken as before . blink at them in amazement , and a look of the deep sorrow shadow his face . " that i should live to see the day ! " he cry . " what ! not one -- -- -- " " my fair lord , " whisper , " they have all step forward . " " ah , by ! i see how it be with them . i could not think that they would desert me . we start at dawn , and be to have the horse of 's company . be ready , i pray , at early cock-crow . " a buzz of delight burst from the archer , as they break their rank and run hither and thither , whoop and cheer like boy who have news of a holiday . gaze after them with a smile face , when a heavy hand fall upon his shoulder . " what ! my knight-errant of ! " say a voice , " you be off to ebro , i hear ; and , by the holy fish of ! you must take me under your banner . " " what ! ! " cry . " i have hear that you be come into camp , and have hope to see you . glad and proud shall i be to have you with me . " " i have a most particular and weighty reason for wish to go , " say the sturdy knight . " i can well believe it , " return ; " i have meet no man who be quick to follow where honor lead . " " nay , it be not for honor that i go , . " " for what then ? " " for pullet . " " pullet ? " " yes , for the rascal vanguard have clear every hen from the . it be this very morning that , my squire , lame his horse in ride round in quest of one , for we have a bag of truffle , and nought to eat with them . never have i see such locust as this vanguard of ours . not a pullet shall we see until we be in front of them ; so i shall leave my runagate to the care of the , and i shall hie south with you , , with my truffle at my . " " , , i know you , " say , shake his head , and the two old soldier ride off together to their pavilion . to the south of in the kingdom of there stretch a high , rise into bare , sterile hill , brown or gray in color , and strew with huge boulder of granite . on the gascon side of the great mountain there have be run stream , meadow , forest , and little nestle village . here , on the contrary , be nothing but naked rock , poor pasture , and savage , waste . gloomy defile or barranca intersect this wild country with mountain torrent dash and foam between their rugged side . the clatter of water , the scream of the eagle , and the howl of wolf the only sound which break upon the silence in that dreary and inhospitable region . through this wild country it be that and his company push their way , ride at time through vast defile where the brown , gnarled cliff shoot up on either side of them , and the sky be but a long wind blue slit between the cluster line of box which fringe the lip of the precipice ; or , again lead their horse along the narrow and rocky path wear by the muleteer upon the edge of the chasm , where under their very elbow they could see the white streak which mark the give which foam a thousand foot below them . so for two day they push their way through the wild place of , past , over the rapid , through , until upon a winter 's evening the mountain fall away from in front of them , and they see the broad blue ebro curve betwixt its double line of homestead and of village . the fisher of be arouse that night by rough voice speak in a strange tongue , and ere morning and his man have ferry the river and be safe upon the land of . all the next day they lie in a pine wood near to the town of , rest their horse and take counsel as to what they should do . have with him , , stout old , the scotch knight-errant , the of , and , all account among the brave knight in the army , together with sixty veteran man-at-arms , and three hundred and twenty archer . spy have be send out in the morning , and return after nightfall to say that the of be encamp some fourteen mile off in the direction of , have with him twenty thousand horse and forty-five thousand foot . a fire have be light , and round this the leader crouch , the glare beating upon their rugged face , while the hardy archer lounge and chat amid the tethered horse , while they munch their scanty provision . " for my part , " say , " i be of opinion that we have already do that which we have come for . for do we not now know where the king be , and how great a following he have , which be the end of our journey . " " true , " answer , " but i have come on this venture because it be a long time since i have break a spear in war , and , certes , i shall not go back until i have run a course with some cavalier of . let those go back who will , but i must see more of these spaniard ere i turn . " " i will not leave you , , " return ; " and yet , as an old soldier and one who have see much of war , i can but think that it be an ill thing for four hundred man to find themselves between an army of sixty thousand on the one side and a broad river on the other . " " yet , " say , " we can for the honor of go back without a blow strike . " " nor for the honor of either , " cry the of . " by ! i wish that i may never set eye upon the water of again , if i pluck my horse 's bridle ere i have see this camp of theirs . " " by ! you have speak very well , " say , " and i have always hear that there be very worthy gentleman among the scot , and fine skirmish to be have upon their border . bethink you , , that we have this news from the lip of common spy , who can scarce tell us as much of the enemy and of his force as the prince would wish to hear . " " you be the leader in this venture , , " the other answer , " and i do but ride under your banner . " " yet i would fain have your rede and counsel , . but , touch what you say of the river , we can take heed that we shall not have it at the back of us , for the prince have now advance to , and thence to , so that if we come upon their camp from the further side we can make good our retreat . " " what then would you propose ? " ask , shake his grizzled head as one who be but half convinced . " that we ride forward ere the news reach them that we have cross the river . in this way we may have sight of their army , and perchance even find occasion for some small deed against them . " " so be it , then , " say ; and the rest of the council have approve , a scanty meal be hurriedly snatch , and the advance resume under the cover of the darkness . all night they lead their horse , stumble and grope through wild defile and rugged valley , follow the guidance of a frightened peasant who be strap by the wrist to 's . with the early dawn they find themselves in a black ravine , with other slope away from it on either side , and the bare brown crag rise in long bleak terrace all round them . " if it please you , fair lord , " say , " this man have mislead us , and since there be no tree upon which we may hang him , it might be well to hurl him over yonder cliff . " the peasant , read the soldier 's meaning in his fierce eye and harsh accent drop upon his knee , scream loudly for mercy . " how come it , dog ? " ask in . " where be this camp to which you swear that you would lead us ? " " by the sweet ! by the bless of ! " cry the tremble peasant , " i swear to you that in the darkness i have myself lose the path . " " over the cliff with him ! " shout half a dozen voice ; but ere the archer could drag him from the rock to which he cling have ride up and call upon them to stop . " how be this , sir ? " say he . " as long as the prince do me the honor to entrust this venture to me , it be for me only to give order ; and , by ! i shall be right blithe to go very deeply into the matter with any one to whom my word may give offence . how say you , ? or you , my of ? or you , ? " " , nay , ! " cry . " this base peasant be too small a matter for old comrade to quarrel over . but he have betray us , and certes he have merit a dog 's death . " " , fellow , " say . " we give you one more chance to find the path . we be about to gain much honor , , in this enterprise , and it would be a sorry thing if the first blood shed be that of an unworthy boor . let us say our morning orison , and it may chance that ere we finish he may strike upon the track . " with bow head and steel cap in hand , the archer stand at their horse 's head , while repeat the , the , and the . do bear the scene in knot of knight in their dull armor , the ruddy visage of , the craggy feature of the scottish earl , the shine scalp of , with the dense ring of hard , bearded face and the long brown head of the horse , all top and circle by the beetle cliff . scarce have the last deep " amen " break from the company , when , in an instant , there rise the scream of a hundred bugle , with the deep rolling of drum and the clash of cymbal , all sound together in one deafen uproar . knight and archer spring to arm , convince that some great host be upon them ; but the guide drop upon his knee and thank for its mercy . " we have find them , caballero ! " he cry . " this be their morning call . if will but deign to follow me , i will set them before you ere a man might tell his bead . " as he speak he scramble down one of the narrow ravine , and , climb over a low ridge at the further end , he lead them into a short valley with a stream purl down the centre of it and a very thick growth of elder and of box upon either side . push their way through the dense brushwood , they look out upon a scene which make their heart beat harder and their breath come faster . in front of them there lie a broad plain , water by two wind stream and cover with grass , stretch away to where , in the furthest distance , the tower of bristle up against the light blue morning sky . over all this vast meadow there lie a great city of upon thousand of them , lay out in street and in square like a well-ordered town . high silken pavilion or color marquee , shoot up from among the crowd of mean dwelling , mark where the great lord and baron of and display their standard , while over the white roof , as far as eye could reach , the wave of ancient , , , and , with flash of gold and glow of color , proclaim that all the chivalry of be muster in the plain beneath them . far off , in the centre of the camp , a huge palace of red and white silk , with the royal arm of waive from the summit , announce that the gallant lie there in the midst of his warrior . as the english adventurer , peep out from behind their brushwood screen , look down upon this wondrous sight they could see that the vast army in front of them be already afoot . the first pink light of the rise sun glitter upon the steel cap and breastplate of dense mass of slinger and of , who drill and march in the space which have be leave for their exercise . a thousand column of smoke reek up into the pure morning air where the faggot be pile and the already simmer . in the open plain cloud of light horse gallop and swoop with sway body and wave javelin , after the fashion which the have adopt from their moorish enemy . all along by the sedgy bank of the river long line of page lead their master ' charger down to water , while the knight themselves lounge in group about the door of their pavilion , or ride out , with their falcon upon their wrist and their greyhound behind them , in quest of quail or of leveret . " by my hilt ! gar . ! " whisper to , as the young squire stand with parted lip and wonder eye , gaze down at the novel scene before him , " we have be seek them all night , but now that we have find them i know not what we be to do with them . " " you say sooth , , " quoth old . " i would that we be upon the far side of ebro again , for there be neither honor nor profit to be gain here . what say you , ? " " by the rood ! " cry the fierce man-at-arms , " i will see the color of their blood ere i turn my mare 's head for the mountain . be i a child , that i should ride for three day and nought but word at the end of it ? " " well say , my sweet honeysuckle ! " cry . " i be with you , like hilt to blade . could i but lay hand upon one of those gay prancer yonder , i doubt not that i should have ransom enough from him to buy my mother a new cow . " " a cow ! " say . " say rather ten acre and a homestead on the bank of . " " say you so ? then , by our ! here be for yonder one in the red jerkin ! " he be about to push recklessly forward into the open , when himself dart in front of him , with his hand upon his breast . " back ! " say he . " our time be not yet come , and we must lie here until evening . throw off your jack and headpiece , least their eye catch the shine , and tether the horse among the rock . " the order be swiftly obey , and in ten minute the archer be stretch along by the side of the brook , munch the bread and the bacon which they have bring in their bag , and crane their neck to watch the ever-changing scene beneath them . very quiet and still they lay , save for a mutter jest or whisper order , for twice during the long morning they hear from amid the hill on either side of them , which show that they have thrust themselves in between the outpost of the enemy . the leader sit amongst the , and take counsel together as to what they should do ; while from below there surge up the buzz of voice , the shouting , the neigh of horse , and all the uproar of a great camp . " what boot it to wait ? " say . " let us ride down upon their camp ere they discover us . " " and so say i , " cry the scottish earl ; " for they do not know that there be any enemy within thirty long league of them . " " for my part , " say , " i think that it be madness , for you can hope to rout this great army ; and where be you to go and what be you to do when they have turn upon you ? how say you , ? " " by the apple of ! " cry the fat knight , " it appear to me that this wind bring a very savory smell of garlic and of onion from their . i be in favor of ride down upon them at once , if my old friend and comrade here be of the same mind . " " , " say , " i have a plan by which we may attempt some small deed upon them , and yet , by the help of , may be able to draw off again ; which , as have say , would be scarce possible in any other way . " " how then , ? " ask several voice . " we shall lie here all day ; for amid this brushwood it be ill for them to see us . then when evening come we shall sally out upon them and see if we may not gain some honorable advancement from them . " " but why then rather than now ? " " because we shall have nightfall to cover us when we draw off , so that we may make our way back through the mountain . i would station a score of archer here in the pass , with all our pennon jut forth from the rock , and as many and drum and bugle as we have with us , so that those who follow us in the fading light may think that the whole army of the prince be upon them , and fear to go further . what think you of my plan , ? " " by my troth ! i think very well of it , " cry the prudent old commander . " if four hundred man must needs run a tilt against sixty thousand , i can see how they can do it good or more safely . " " and so say i , " cry , heartily . " but i wish the day be over , for it will be an ill thing for us if they chance to light upon us . " the word be scarce out of his mouth when there come a clatter of loose stone , the sharp clink of trot hoof , and a cavalier , mount upon a white horse , burst through the bush and ride swiftly down the valley from the end which be farthest from the spanish camp . lightly arm , with his vizor open and a hawk perch upon his left wrist , he look about him with the careless air of a man who be bend wholly upon pleasure , and unconscious of the possibility of danger . suddenly , however , his eye light upon the fierce face which glare out at him from the brushwood . with a cry of terror , he thrust his spur into his horse 's side and dash for the narrow opening of the gorge . for a moment it seem as though he would have reach it , for he have trample over or dash aside the archer who throw themselves in his way ; but seize him by the foot in his grasp of iron and drag him from the saddle , while two other catch the frightened horse . " , ! " roar the great archer . " how many cow wilt buy my mother , if i set free ? " " hush that bull be bellow ! " cry impatiently . " bring the man here . by ! it be not the first time that we have meet ; for , if i mistake not , it be , who be once at the prince 's court . " " it be indeed i , " say the spanish knight , speak in the french tongue , " and i pray you to pass your sword through my heart , for how can i , a caballero of be drag from my horse by the base hand of a common archer ? " " fret not for that , " answer . " for , in sooth , have he not pull you down , a dozen shaft have cross each other in your body . " " by ! it be well so than to be pollute by his touch , " answer the spaniard , with his black eye sparkling with rage and hatred . " i trust that i be now the prisoner of some honorable knight or gentleman . " " you be the prisoner of the man who take you , , " answer . " and i may tell you that good man than either you or i have find themselves before now prisoner in the hand of archer of . " " what ransom , then , do he demand ? " ask the spaniard . scratch his red head and grin in high delight when the question be propound to him . " tell him , " say he , " that i shall have ten cow and a bull too , if it be but a little one . also a dress of blue for mother and a red one for ; with five acre of , two scythe , and a fine new grindstone . likewise a small house , with stall for the cow , and gallon of beer for the thirsty weather . " " tut , tut ! " cry , laugh . " all these thing may be have for money ; and i think , , that five thousand crown be not too much for so renown a knight . " " it shall be duly pay him . " " for some day we must keep you with us ; and i must crave leave also to use your shield , your armor , and your horse . " " my harness be yours by the law of arm , " say the spaniard , gloomily . " i do but ask the loan of it . i have need of it this day , but it shall be duly return to you . set guard , , with arrow on string , at either end of the pass ; for it may happen that some other cavalier may visit us ere the time be come . " all day the little band of englishman lie in the sheltered gorge , look down upon the vast host of their unconscious enemy . shortly after , a great uproar of shout and cheer break out in the camp , with muster of man and call of bugle . clamber up among the rock , the companion see a long rolling cloud of dust along the whole eastern , with the glint of spear and the flutter of pennon , which announce the approach of a large body of cavalry . for a moment a wild hope come upon them that perhaps the prince have move more swiftly than have be plan , that he have cross the ebro , and that this be his vanguard sweep to the attack . " surely i see the red pile of at the head of yonder squadron ! " cry , shade his eye with his hand . " not so , " answer , who have watch the approach host with a darken face . " it be even as i fear . that be the double eagle of . " " you say very truly , " cry the of . " these be the levy of , for i can see the ensign of the , with that of the of and of , and of many another from and . " " by ! i be very glad of it , " say . " of these spaniard i know nothing ; but the french be very worthy gentleman , and will do what they can for our advancement . " " there be at the least four thousand of them , and all man-at-arms , " cry . " see , there be himself , beside his banner , and there be , who ride to welcome him . now they all turn and come into the camp together . " as he speak , the vast throng of spaniard and of frenchman troop across the plain , with brandish arm and toss banner . all day long the sound of revelry and of rejoice from the crowded camp swell up to the ear of the englishman , and they could see the soldier of the two nation throw themselves into each other 's arm and dance hand-in-hand round the blaze fire . the sun have sink behind a cloud-bank in the west before at last give word that the man should resume their arm and have their horse ready . he have himself throw off his armor , and have dress himself from head to foot in the harness of the capture spaniard . " , " say he , " it be my intention to attempt a small deed , and i ask you therefore that you will lead this outfall upon the camp . for me , i will ride into their camp with my squire and two archer . i pray you to watch me , and to ride forth when i be come among the tent . you will leave twenty man behind here , as we plan this morning , and you will ride back here after you have venture as far as seem good to you . " " i will do as you order , ; but what be it that you propose to do ? " " you will see anon , and indeed it be but a trifling matter . , you will come with me , and lead a spare horse by the bridle . i will have the two archer who ride with us through , for they be trusty man and of stout heart . let them ride behind us , and let them leave their bow here among the bush for it be not my wish that they should know that we be englishman . say no word to any whom we may meet , and , if any speak to you , pass on as though you hear them not . be you ready ? " " i be ready , my fair lord , " say . " and i , " " and i , " cry and . " then the rest i leave to your wisdom , ; and if send us fortune we shall meet you again in this gorge ere it be dark . " so say , mount the white horse of the spanish cavalier , and ride quietly forth from his concealment with his three companion behind him , lead his master 's own steed by the bridle . so many small party of french and spanish horse be sweep hither and thither that the small band attract little notice , and make its way at a gentle trot across the plain , they come as far as the camp without challenge or hindrance . on and on they push past the endless line of tent , amid the dense swarm of horseman and of footman , until the huge royal pavilion stretch in front of them . they be close upon it when of a sudden there break out a wild hubbub from a distant portion of the camp , with scream and war-cry and all the wild tumult of battle . at the sound soldier come rush from their tent , knight shout loudly for their squire , and there be mad turmoil on every hand of bewilder man and plunge horse . at the royal tent a crowd of gorgeously dress servant run hither and thither in helpless panic for the guard of soldier who be station there have already ride off in the direction of the alarm . a man-at-arms on either side of the doorway be the sole protector of the royal dwelling . " i have come for the king , " whisper ; " and , by ! he must back with us or i must bide here . " and spring from their horse , and fly at the two sentry , who be disarm and beat down in an instant by so furious and unexpected an attack . dash into the royal tent , and be follow by as soon as the horse have be secure . from within come wild and the clash of steel , and then the two emerge once more , their sword and forearm redden with blood , while bear over his shoulder the senseless body of a man whose gay surcoat , adorn with the lion and tower of , proclaim him to belong to the royal house . a crowd of sewer and page swarm at their heel , those behind push forwards , while the foremost shrink back from the fierce face and reek weapon of the adventurer . the senseless body be throw across the spare horse , the four spring to their saddle , and away they thunder with loose rein and busy spur through the swarm camp . but confusion and disorder still reign among the spaniard for and his man have sweep through half their camp , leave a long litter of the dead and the die to mark their course . uncertain who be their attacker , and unable to tell their english enemy from their breton ally , the spanish knight ride wildly hither and thither in aimless fury . the mad turmoil , the mixture of race , and the fading light , be all in favor of the four who alone know their own purpose among the vast uncertain multitude . twice ere they reach open ground they have to break their way through small body of horse , and once there come a whistle of arrow and sing of stone about their ear ; but , still dash onwards , they shoot out from among the tent and find their own comrade retreat for the mountain at no very great distance from them . another five minute of wild gallop over the plain , and they be all back in their gorge , while their pursuer fall back before the rolling of drum and blare of trumpet , which seem to proclaim that the whole army of the prince be about to emerge from the mountain pass . " by my soul ! , " cry , wave a great boil ham over his head , " i have come by something which i may eat with my truffle ! i have a hard fight for it , for there be three of them with their mouth open and the knife in their hand , all sit agape round the table , when i rush in upon them . how say you , , will you not try the smack of the famed spanish swine , though we have but the brook water to wash it down ? " " later , , " answer the old soldier , wipe his grime face . " we must further into the mountain ere we be in safety . but what have we here , ? " " it be a prisoner whom i have take , and in sooth , as he come from the royal tent and wear the royal arm upon his jupon , i trust that he be the of . " " the of ! " cry the companion , crowd round in amazement . " nay , , " say , peer at the prisoner through the uncertain light , " i have twice see of , and certes this man in no way resemble him . " " then , by the light of heaven ! i will ride back for him , " cry . " nay , nay , the camp be in arm , and it would be rank madness . who be you , fellow ? " he add in spanish , " and how be it that you dare to wear the arm of ? " the prisoner be bend recover the consciousness which have be squeeze from him by the grip of . " if it please you , " he answer , " i and nine other be the of the king , and must ever wear his arm , so as to shield him from even such peril as have threaten him this night . the king be at the tent of the brave , where he will sup to night . but i be a caballero of , , and , though i be no king , i be yet ready to pay a fitting price for my ransom . " " by ! i will not touch your gold , " cry . " go back to your master and give him greet from of , tell him that i have hope to make his good acquaintance this night , and that , if i have disorder his tent , it be but in my eagerness to know so famed and courteous a knight . spur on , comrade ! for we must cover many a league ere we can venture to light fire or to loosen girth . i have hope to ride without this patch , but it seem that i must carry it yet a little longer . " it be a cold , bleak morning in the beginning of , and the mist be drift in dense rolling cloud through the pass of the mountain . the , who have pass the night in a sheltered gully , be already astir , some crowd round the blaze fire and other romp or leap over each other 's back for their limb be chill and the air bite . here and there , through the dense haze which surround them , there loom out huge pinnacle and jut boulder of rock : while high above the sea of vapor there towered up one gigantic peak , with the pink glow of the early sunshine upon its snow-capped head . the ground be wet , the rock dripping , the grass and sparkling with bead of moisture ; yet the camp be loud with laughter and merriment , for a messenger have ride in from the prince with word of praise for what they have do , and with order that they should still abide in the forefront of the army . round one of the fire be cluster four or five of the lead man of the archer , clean the rust from their weapon , and glance impatiently from time to time at a great pot which smoke over the blaze . there be squat cross-legged in his shirt , while he scrub away at his chain-mail brigandine , whistle loudly the while . on one side of him sit old , who be busy in trim the feather of some arrow to his liking ; and on the other , who lie with his great limb all , and his headpiece balance upon his uplift foot . of crouch amid the rock , croon an ballad to himself , while he whet his sword upon a flat stone which lie across his knee ; while beside him sit , and , the silent squire of , hold out their chill hand towards the crackling faggot . " cast on another , , and stir the broth with , " growl , look anxiously for the twentieth time at the reek pot . " by my hilt ! " cry , " now that have come by this great ransom , he will scarce abide the fare of poor archer lad . how say you , ? when you see once more , there will be no penny ale and fat bacon , but gascon wine and bake meat every day of the seven . " " i know not about that , " say , kick his helmet up into the air and catch it in his hand . " i do but know that whether the broth be ready or no , i be about to dip this into it . " " it simmer and it boil , " cry , push his face through the smoke . in an instant the pot have be pluck from the blaze , and its content have be scoop up in half a dozen steel , which be balance betwixt their owner ' knee , while , with spoon and gobbet of bread , they devour their morning meal . " it be ill weather for bow , " remark at last , when , with a long sigh , he drain the last drop from his helmet . " my string be as limp as a cow 's tail this morning . " " you should rub them with water glue , " quoth . " you remember , , that it be wetter than this on the morning of , and yet i can call to mind that there be aught amiss with our string . " " it be in my thought , " say , still pensively grind his sword , " that we may have need of your string ere sundown . i dream of the red cow last night . " " and what be this red cow , ? " ask . " i know not , young sir ; but i can only say that on the eve of , and on the eve of , and on the eve of , i dream of a red cow ; and now the dream have come upon me again , so i be now set a very keen edge to my blade . " " well say , old ! " cry . " by my hilt ! i pray that your dream may come true , for the prince have not set us out here to drink broth or to gather . one more fight , and i be ready to hang up my bow , marry a wife , and take to the fire corner . but how now , ? whom be it that you seek ? " " the crave your attendance in his tent , " say a young archer to . the squire rise and proceed to the pavilion , where he find the knight seat upon a cushion , with his leg cross in front of him and a broad ribbon of parchment lay across his knee , over which he be pore with frown brow and purse lip . " it come this morning by the prince 's messenger , " say he , " and be bring from by , who be new come from . what make you of this upon the outer side ? " " it be fairly and clearly write , " answer , " and it signify to , of , by the hand of , the servant of at the priory of . " " so i read it , " say . " now i pray you to read what be set forth within . " turn to the letter , and , as his eye rest upon it , his face turn pale and a cry of surprise and grief burst from his lip . " what then ? " ask the knight , peer up at him anxiously . " there be nought amiss with the or with the ? " " it be my poor unhappy brother ! " cry , with his hand to his brow . " he be dead . " " by ! i have never hear that he have show so much love for you that you should mourn him so . " " yet he be my only kith or kin that i have upon earth . mayhap he have cause to be bitter against me , for his land be give to the abbey for my upbringing . alas ! alas ! and i raise my staff against him when last we meet ! he have be slay , i fear , amidst crime and violence . " " ! " say . " read on , i pray you . " " ' be with , my honor lord , and have in his holy keeping . the have ask me to set down in write what have befall at , and all that concern the death of ill neighbor the of . for when have leave us , this evil man gather around him all outlaw , villein , and masterless man , until they be come to such a force that they slay and scatter the king 's man who go against them . then , come forth from the wood , they lay siege to castle , and for two day they gird us in and shoot hard against us , with such number as be a marvel to see . yet the hold the place stoutly , and on the second day the be his own man , as some that we be deliver from their hand ; for which praise be to all the saint , and more especially to the holy , upon whose feast it come to pass . the , and the , fair daughter , be in good health ; and so also be i , save for an imposthume of the , which have be send me for my sin . all the saint preserve ! ' " " it be the vision of the , " say , after a pause . " mark you not how she say that the leader be one with a yellow beard , and how he fall before the gate . but how come it , , that this woman , to whom all thing be as crystal , and who have not say one word which have not come to pass , be yet so lead astray as to say that your thought turn to even more than my own ? " " my fair lord , " say , with a flush on his cheek , " the may have speak sooth when she say it ; for be in my heart by day and in my dream by night . " " ! " cry , with a sidelong glance . " yes , my fair lord ; for indeed i love your daughter , the ; and , unworthy as i be , i would give my heart 's blood to serve her . " " by ! , " say the knight coldly , arch his eyebrow , " you aim high in this matter . our blood be very old . " " and mine also be very old , " answer the squire . " and the be our single child . all our name and land centre upon her . " " alas ! that i should say it , but i also be now the only . " " and why have i not hear this from you before , ? in sooth , i think that you have use me ill . " " , my fair lord , say not so ; for i know not whether your daughter love me , and there be no pledge between us . " ponder for a few moment , and then burst out . " by ! " say he , " i know not why i should mix in the matter ; for i have ever find that the be very well able to look to her own affair . since first she could stamp her little foot , she have ever be able to get that for which she crave ; and if she set her heart on , , and thou on her , i do not think that this spanish king , with his three-score thousand man , could hold you apart . yet this i will say , that i would see you a full knight ere you go to my daughter with word of love . i have ever say that a brave lance should wed her ; and , by my soul ! , if spare you , i think that you will acquit yourself well . but enough of such trifle , for we have our work before us , and it will be time to speak of this matter when we see the white cliff of once more . go to , i pray you , and ask him to come hither , for it be time that we be march . there be no pass at the further end of the valley , and it be a perilous place should an enemy come upon us . " deliver his message , and then wander forth from the camp , for his mind be all in a whirl with this unexpected news , and with his talk with . sit upon a rock , with his burning brow rest upon his hand , he think of his brother , of their quarrel , of the in her bedraggled , of the gray old castle , of the proud pale face in the armory , and of the last fiery word with which she have speed him on his way . then he be but a penniless , lad , unknown and unfriended . now he be himself of , the head of an old stock , and the lord of an estate which , if reduce from its former size , be still ample to preserve the dignity of his family . further , he have become a man of experience , be count brave among brave man , have win the esteem and confidence of her father , and , above all , have be listen to by him when he tell him the secret of his love . as to the gain of knighthood , in such stirring time it be no great matter for a brave squire of gentle birth to aspire to that honor . he would leave his bone among these spanish ravine , or he would do some deed which would call the eye of man upon him . be still seat on the rock , his grief and his joy drift swiftly over his mind like the shadow of cloud upon a sunlit meadow , when of a sudden he become conscious of a low , deep sound which come boom up to him through the fog . close behind him he could hear the murmur of the bowman , the occasional burst of hoarse laughter , and the champ and stamp of their horse . behind it all , however , come that low-pitched , hum , which seem to come from every quarter and to fill the whole air . in the old monastic day he remember to have hear such a sound when he have walk out one windy night at , and have listen to the long wave break upon the shingly shore . here , however , be neither wind nor sea , and yet the dull murmur rise ever loud and strong out of the heart of the rolling sea of vapor . he turn and run to the camp , shout an alarm at the top of his voice . it be but a hundred pace , and yet ere he have cross it every bowman be ready at his horse 's head , and the group of knight be out and listen intently to the ominous sound . " it be a great body of horse , " say , " and they be ride very swiftly . " " yet they must be from the prince 's army , " remark , " for they come from the north . " " , " say the of , " it be not so certain ; for the peasant with whom we speak last night say that it be rumor that , the spanish king 's brother , have ride with six thousand choose man to beat up the prince 's camp . it may be that on their backward road they have come this way . " " by ! " cry , " i think that it be even as you say , for that same peasant have a sour face and a shift eye , as one who bear us little good will . i doubt not that he have bring these cavalier upon us . " " but the mist cover us , " say . " we have yet time to ride through the further end of the pass . " " be we a troop of mountain goat we might do so , " answer , " but it be not to be pass by a company of horseman . if these be indeed and his man , then we must bide where we be , and do what we can to make them rue the day that they find us in their path . " " well speak , ! " cry , in high delight . " if there be so many as have be say , then there will be much honor to be gain from them and every hope of advancement . but the sound have cease , and i fear that they have go some other way . " " or mayhap they have come to the mouth of the gorge , and be marshal their rank . and hearken ! for they be no great way from us . " the company stand peer into the dense , amidst a silence so profound that the dripping of the water from the rock and the breathing of the horse grow loud upon the ear . suddenly from out the sea of mist come the shrill sound of a neigh , follow by a long blast upon a bugle . " it be a spanish call , my fair lord , " say . " it be use by their pricker and huntsman when the beast have not flee , but be still in its lair . " " by my faith ! " say , smile , " if they be in a humor for we may promise them some sport ere they sound the mort over us . but there be a hill in the centre of the gorge on which we might take our stand . " " i mark it , " say , " and no good spot could be find for our purpose , for it be very steep at the back . it be but a to the left , and , indeed , i can see the shadow of it . " the whole company , lead their horse , pass across to the small hill which loom in front of them out of the mist . it be indeed admirably design for defence , for it slope down in front , all jag and , while it fall away in a sheer cliff of a hundred foot or more . on the summit be a small uneven plateau , with a stretch across of a hundred pace , and a depth of half as much again . " unloose the horse ! " say . " we have no space for them , and if we hold our own we shall have horse and to spare when this day 's work be do . nay , keep yours , my fair sir , for we may have work for them . , , let your man form a harrow on either side of the ridge . and you , my , i give you the right wing , and the leave to you , , and to you , . i and will hold the centre with our man-at-arms . now order the rank , and fling wide the banner , for our soul be 's and our body the king 's , and our sword for and for ! " have scarcely speak when the mist seem to thin in the valley , and to shred away into long ragged cloud which trail from the edge of the cliff . the gorge in which they have camp be a mere wedge-shaped cleft among the hill , three-quarter of a mile deep , with the small rugged rising upon which they stand at the further end , and the brown crag wall it in on three side . as the mist part , and the sun break through , it gleam and shimmer with dazzling brightness upon the armor and headpiece of a vast body of horseman who stretch across the barranca from one cliff to the other , and extend backwards until their rear guard be far out upon the plain beyond . line after line , and rank after rank , they choke the neck of the valley with a long vista of toss pennon , twinkle lance , wave plume and stream , while the curvet and of the charger lend a constant motion and shimmer to the glitter , mass . a yell of exultation , and a forest of wave steel through the length and breadth of their column , announce that they could at last see their entrap enemy , while the swell note of a hundred bugle and drum , mix with the clash of moorish cymbal , break forth into a proud peal of martial triumph . strange it be to these gallant and sparkling cavalier of to look upon this handful of man upon the hill , the thin line of bowman , the knot of knight and man-at-arms with armor rust and discolor from long service , and to learn that these be indeed the soldier whose fame and prowess have be the camp-fire talk of every army in . very still and silent they stand , lean upon their bow , while their leader take counsel together in front of them . no clang of bugle rise from their stern rank , but in the centre wave the leopard of , on the right the ensign of their company with the rose of , and on the left , over three score of welsh bowman , there float the red banner of with the of the . gravely and sedately they stand beneath the morning sun wait for the onslaught of their foeman . " by ! " say , gaze with pucker eye down the valley , " there appear to be some very worthy people among them . what be this golden banner which wave upon the left ? " " it be the ensign of the of , " answer . " and the other upon the right ? " " it mark the of , and i see by his flag that their ride at their head . there too be the banner of amid yonder sparkling squadron which head the main battle . there be six thousand man-at-arms with ten squadron of slinger as far as i may judge their number . " " there be frenchman among them , my fair lord , " remark . " i can see the pennon of , , , and many other who strike in against us for of . " " you be right , " say , " for i can also see them . there be much spanish blazonry also , if i could but read it . , you know the arm of your own land . who be they who have do us this honor ? " the spanish prisoner look with exultant eye upon the deep and serried rank of his countryman . " by ! " say he , " if fall this day fall by no mean hand , for the flower of the knighthood of ride under the banner of , with the chivalry of , , , , , and . i see the guidon of , , , , with the two great order , and the knight of and of . if you will take my rede you will come to a composition with them , for they will give you such term as you have give me . " " , by ! it be pity if so many brave man be draw together , and no little deed of arm to come of it . ! , they advance upon us ; and , by my soul ! it be a sight that be worth come over the sea to see . " as he speak , the two wing of the spanish host , consist of the of on the one side and of upon the other , come swoop swiftly down the valley , while the main body follow more slowly behind . five hundred pace from the the two great body of horse cross each other , and , sweep round in a curve , retire in feign confusion towards their centre . often in bygone war have the moor tempt the hot-blooded spaniard from their place of strength by such pretend flight , but there be man upon the hill to whom every ruse and trick of war be as their daily trade and practice . again and even near come the rally spaniard , and again with cry of fear and stoop body they swerve off to right and leave , but the still stand stolid and observant among their rock . the vanguard halt a long bow shot from the hill , and with wave spear and vaunt shout challenge their enemy to come forth , while two cavalier , prick forward from the glitter rank , walk their horse slowly between the two array with target brace and lance in rest like the challenger in a tourney . " by ! " cry , with his one eye glowing like an ember , " these appear to be two very worthy and debonair gentleman . i do not call to mind when i have see any people who seem of so great a heart and so high of enterprise . we have our horse , : shall we not relieve them of any vow which they may have upon their soul ? " 's reply be to bound upon his charger , and to urge it down the slope , while follow not three behind him . it be a rugged course , rocky and uneven , yet the two knight , choose their man , dash onwards at the top of their speed , while the gallant spaniard fly as swiftly to meet them . the one to whom find himself oppose be a tall stripling with a stag 's head upon his shield , while 's man be broad and squat with plain steel harness , and a pink and white bind round his helmet . the first strike on the target with such force as to split it from side to side , but 's lance crash through the camail which shield the spaniard 's throat , and he fall , scream hoarsely , to the ground . carry away by the heat and madness of fight , the english knight never draw rein , but charge straight on into the array of the knight of . long time the silent rank upon the hill could see a swirl and eddy deep down in the heart of the spanish column , with a circle of rear charger and flash blade . here and there toss the white plume of the english helmet , rise and fall like the foam upon a wave , with the fierce gleam and sparkle ever circle round it until at last it have sink from view , and another brave man have turn from war to peace . , meanwhile , have find a foeman worthy of his steel for his opponent be none other than , the pick lance of the monkish of , who have win fame in a hundred bloody combat with the moor of . so fierce be their meeting that their spear shiver up to the very grasp , and the horse rear backwards until it seem that they must crash down upon their rider . yet with consummate horsemanship they both swing round in a long curvet , and then pluck out their sword they lash at each other like two lusty smith hammer upon an anvil . the charger spin round each other , biting and striking , while the two blade wheel and whizz and circle in gleam of dazzling light . cut , parry , and thrust follow so swiftly upon each other that the eye could not follow them , until at last come thigh to thigh , they cast their arm around each other and roll off their saddle to the ground . the heavy spaniard throw himself upon his enemy , and pin him down beneath him raise his sword to slay him , while a shout of triumph rise from the rank of his countryman . but the fatal blow never fall , for even as his arm quiver before descend , the spaniard give a shudder , and stiffen himself roll heavily over upon his side , with the blood gush from his armpit and from the slit of his vizor . spring to his foot with his bloody dagger in his leave hand and gaze down upon his adversary , but that fatal and sudden stab in the vital spot , which the spaniard have expose by raise his arm , have prove instantly mortal . the englishman leap upon his horse and make for the hill , at the very instant that a yell of rage from a thousand voice and the clang of a score of bugle announce the spanish onset . but the islander be ready and eager for the encounter . with foot firmly plant , their sleeve roll back to give free play to their muscle , their long yellow in their left hand , and their quiver sling to the front , they have wait in the harrow formation which give strength to their array , and yet permit every man to draw his arrow freely without harm to those in front . and have be engage in throw light tuft of grass into the air to gauge the wind force , and a hoarse whisper pass down the rank from the to the man , with scrap of advice and admonition . " do not shoot outside the pace , " cry . " we may need all our shaft ere we have do with them . " " well to overshoot than to undershoot , " add . " well to strike the rear guard than to feather a shaft in the earth . " " loose quick and sharp when they come , " add another . " let it be the eye to the string , the string to the shaft , and the shaft to the mark . by our ! their banner advance , and we must hold our ground now if ever we be to see again . " , standing with his sword draw amidst the archer , see a long toss and heave of the glitter squadron . then the front rank begin to surge slowly forward , to trot , to canter , to gallop , and in an instant the whole vast array be hurtle onward , line after line , the air full of the thunder of their cry , the ground shake with the beat of their hoof , the valley choke with the rush torrent of steel , top by the wave plume , the slanting spear and the flutter . on they sweep over the level and up to the slope , ere they meet the blinding storm of the english arrow . down go the whole rank in a whirl of mad confusion , horse plunge and kick , bewilder man fall , rise , stagger on or back , while ever new line of horseman come spur through the gap and urge their charger up the fatal slope . all around him could hear the stern , short order of the , while the air be fill with the keen twang of the string and the swish and patter of the shaft . right across the foot of the hill there have spring up a long wall of struggle horse and stricken man , which ever grow and heighten as fresh squadron pour on the attack . one young knight on a gray jennet leap over his fall comrade and gallop swiftly up the hill , shriek loudly upon , ere he fall within a of the english line , with the feather of arrow thrust out from every crevice and joint of his armor . so for five long minute the gallant horseman of and of strive ever and again to force a passage , until the wail note of a bugle call them back , and they ride slowly out of , leave their good and their brave in the ghastly , heap behind them . but there be little rest for the victor . whilst the knight have charge them in front the slinger have creep round upon either flank and have gain a footing upon the cliff and behind the outlying rock . a storm of stone break suddenly upon the defender , who , draw up in line upon the exposed summit , offer a fair mark to their hidden foe . , the old archer , be strike upon the temple and fall dead without a groan , while fifteen of his bowman and six of the man-at-arms be strike down at the same moment . the other lie on their face to avoid the deadly hail , while at each side of the plateau a fringe of bowman exchange shot with the slinger and among the rock , aim mainly at those who have swarm up the cliff , and burst into laughter and cheer when a shaft bring one of their opponent topple down from his lofty perch . " i think , , " say , stride across to the little knight , " that we should all acquit ourselves good have we our , for the sun be high in the heaven . " " by ! " quoth , pluck the patch from his eye , " i think that i be now clear of my vow , for this spanish knight be a person from whom much honor might be win . indeed , he be a very worthy gentleman , of good courage , and great hardiness , and it grieve me that he should have come by such a hurt . as to what you say of food , , it be not to be think of , for we have nothing with us upon the hill . " " ! " cry , hurry up with consternation upon his face , " tell me that there be not arrow leave in all their sheave . see ! they be spring from their horse , and cut their solleret that they may rush upon us . might we not even now make a retreat ? " " my soul will retreat from my body first ! " cry the little knight . " here i be , and here i bide , while give me strength to lift a sword . " " and so say i ! " shout , throw his mace high into the air and catch it again by the handle . " to your arm , man ! " roar . " shoot while you may , and then out sword , and let us live or die together ! " then up rise from the hill in the rugged valley a sound such as have not be hear in those part before , nor be again , until the stream which ripple amid the rock have be freeze by over four hundred winter and thaw by as many return spring . deep and full and strong it thunder down the ravine , the fierce of a warrior race , the last stern welcome to should join with them in that game where the stake be death . thrice it swell forth and thrice it sink away , echo and reverberate amidst the crag . then , with set face , the company rise up among the storm of stone , and look down upon the thousand who speed swiftly up the slope against them . horse and spear have be set aside , but on foot , with sword and battle-axe , their broad shield sling in front of them , the chivalry of rush to the attack . and now arise a struggle so fall , so long , so evenly sustain , that even now the memory of it be hand down amongst the mountaineer and the ill-omened knoll be still point out by father to their child as the " , " where the man from across the sea fight the great fight with the knight of the south . the last arrow be quickly shoot , nor could the slinger hurl their stone , so close be friend and foe . from side to side stretch the thin line of the , lightly arm and , while against it storm and rage the pressing throng of fiery spaniard and of gallant . the clink of cross , the dull thud of heavy blow , the pant and gasp of weary and wounded man , all rise together in a wild , note , which swell upwards to the ear of the wonder peasant who look down from the edge of the cliff upon the sway turmoil of the battle beneath them . back and forward reel the leopard banner , now bear up the slope by the rush and weight of the onslaught , now push downwards again as , , and with their veteran arm , fling themselves madly into the fray . , at his lord 's right hand , find himself sweep hither and thither in the desperate struggle , exchange savage thrust one instant with a spanish cavalier , and the next tear away by the whirl of man and dash up against some new antagonist . to the right , , , and the bowman of the company fight furiously against the monkish of , who be lead up the hill by their great , man , who wear a brown monastic habit over his suit of mail . three archer he slay in three giant stroke , but fling his arm round him , and the two , stagger and strain , reel backwards and fall , lock in each other 's grasp , over the edge of the steep cliff which flank the hill . in vain his knight storm and rave against the thin line which bar their path : the sword of and the great axe of gleam in the forefront of the battle and huge jagged piece of rock , hurl by the strong arm of the bowman , crash and hurtle amid their rank . slowly they give back down the hill , the archer still hang upon their skirt , with a long litter of writhe and twisted figure to mark the course which they have take . at the same instant the welshman upon the left , lead on by the scotch earl , have charge out from among the rock which shelter them , and by the fury of their outfall have drive the spaniard in front of them in headlong flight down the hill . in the centre only thing seem to be go ill with the defender . be , as he would wish to have die , like a grim old wolf in its lair with a ring of his slay around him . twice have be overbear , and twice have fight over him until he have stagger to his foot once more . lie senseless , stun by a blow from a mace , and half of the man-at-arms lie litter upon the ground around him . 's shield be break , his crest shear , his armor cut and smash , and the vizor tear from his helmet ; yet he spring hither and thither with light foot and ready hand , engage two and a spaniard at the same , stoop , dash in , spring still fight by his side , stem with a handful of man the fierce tide which surge up against them . yet it would have fare ill with them have not the archer from either side close in upon the flank of the attacker , and press them very slowly and foot by foot down the long slope , until they be on the plain once more , where their fellow be already rally for a fresh assault . but terrible indeed be the cost at which the last have be repel . of the three hundred and seventy man who have hold the crest , one hundred and be leave standing , many of whom be sorely wounded and weak from loss of blood . , , , , , a hundred and fifty archer , and man-at-arms have fall , while the pitiless hail of stone be already whiz and pipe once more about their ear , threaten every instant to further reduce their number . look about him at his shattered rank , and his face flush with a soldier 's pride . " by ! " he cry , " i have fight in many a little bickering , but never one that i would be more loth to have miss than this . but you be wound , ? " " it be nought , " answer his squire , stanch the blood which drip from a sword-cut across his forehead . " these gentleman of seem to be most courteous and worthy people . i see that they be already form to continue this debate with us . form up the bowman two deep instead of four . by my faith ! some very brave man have go from among us . , you be a trusty soldier , for all that your shoulder have never feel accolade , nor your heel wear the gold spur . do you take charge of the right ; i will hold the centre , and you , my of , the left . " " ! for ! " cry a rough voice among the archer , and a roar of laughter greet their new leader . " by my hilt ! " say the old bowman , " i never think to lead a wing in a stricken field . stand close , , for , by these ! we must play the man this day . " " come hither , , " say , walk back to the edge of the cliff which form the rear of their position . " and you , , " he continue , beckon to the squire of , " do you also come here . " the two squire hurry across to him , and the three stand look down into the rocky ravine which lie a hundred and fifty foot beneath them . " the prince must hear of how thing be with us , " say the knight . " another we may withstand , but they be many and we be few , so that the time must come when we can no longer form line across the hill . yet if help be bring us we might hold the crest until it come . see yonder horse which stray among the rock beneath us ? " " i see them , my fair lord . " " and see yonder path which wind along the hill upon the further end of the valley ? " " i see it . " " be you on those horse , and ride up yonder track , steep and rough as it be , i think that might gain the valley beyond . then on to the prince , and tell him how we fare . " " but , my fair lord , how can we hope to reach the horse ? " ask . " can go round to them , for they would be upon ere could come to them . think that have heart enough to clamber down this cliff ? " " have we but a rope . " " there be one here . it be but one hundred foot long , and for the rest must trust to and to your finger . can you try it , ? " " with all my heart , my dear lord , but how can i leave you in such a strait ? " " nay , it be to serve me that go . and you , ? " the silent squire say nothing , but he take up the rope , and , have examine it , he tie one end firmly round a project rock . then he cast off his breast-plate , thigh piece , and greave , while follow his example . " , or , or , should the prince have go forward , " cry . " now may speed , for be brave and worthy man . " it be , indeed , a task which might make the heart of the brave sink within him . the thin cord dangle down the face of the brown cliff seem from above to reach little more than half-way down it . stretch the rugged rock , wet and shine , with a green tuft here and there thrust out from it , but little sign of ridge or foothold . far below the jagged point of the boulder bristle up , dark and menace . tug thrice with all his strength upon the cord , and then lower himself over the edge , while a hundred anxious face peer over at him as he slowly clamber downwards to the end of the rope . twice he stretch out his foot , and twice he fail to reach the point at which he aim , but even as he swing himself for a third effort a stone from a sling buzz like a wasp from amid the rock and strike him full upon the side of his head . his grasp relax , his foot slip , and in an instant he be a crush and mangle corpse upon the sharp ridge beneath him . " if i have no good fortune , " say , lead aside . " i pray you , my dear lord , that you will give my humble service to the , and say to her that i be ever her true servant and most unworthy cavalier . " the old knight say no word , but he put a hand on either shoulder , and kiss his squire , with the tear shine in his eye . spring to the rope , and slide swiftly down , soon find himself at its extremity . from above it seem as though rope and cliff be well-nigh touching , but now , when swing a hundred foot down , the squire find that he could scarce reach the face of the rock with his foot , and that it be as smooth as glass , with no where a mouse could stand . some three foot lower , however , his eye light upon a long jagged crack which slant downwards , and this he must reach if he would save not only his own poor life , but that of the man above him . yet it be madness to spring for that narrow slit with nought but the wet , smooth rock to cling to . he swing for a moment , full of thought , and even as he hang there another of the hellish stone sing through his curl , and strike a chip from the face of the cliff . up he clamber a few foot , draw up the loose end after him , unsling his belt , hold on with knee and with elbow while he splice the long , tough leathern belt to the end of the cord : then lower himself as far as he could go , he swing backwards and forwards until his hand reach the crack , when he leave the rope and cling to the face of the cliff . another stone strike him on the side , and he hear a sound like a breaking stick , with a keen stab pain which shoot through his chest . yet it be no time now to think of pain or ache . there be his lord and his comrade , and they must be pluck from the jaw of death . on he clamber , with his hand shuffle down the long sloping crack , sometimes bear all his weight upon his arm , at other find some small shelf or tuft on which to rest his foot . would he never pass over that fifty foot ? he dare not look down and could but grope slowly onwards , his face to the cliff , his finger clutch , his foot scrape and feel for a support . every vein and crack and mottle of that face of rock remain forever stamp upon his memory . at last , however , his foot come upon a broad and he venture to cast a glance downwards . thank ! he have reach the high of those fatal pinnacle upon which his comrade have fall . quickly now he spring from rock to rock until his foot be on the ground , and he have his hand stretch out for the horse 's rein , when a strike him on the head , and he drop senseless upon the ground . an evil blow it be for , but a bad one still for him who strike it . the spanish slinger , see the youth lie slay , and judge from his dress that he be no common man , rush forward to plunder him , know well that the bowman above him have expend their last shaft . he be still three pace , however , from his victim 's side when upon the cliff above pluck up a huge boulder , and , poise it for an instant , drop it with fatal aim upon the slinger beneath him . it strike upon his shoulder , and hurl him , crushed and scream , to the ground , while , recall to his sense by these shrill cry in his very ear , stagger on to his foot , and gaze wildly about him . his eye fall upon the horse , graze upon the scanty pasture , and in an instant all have come back to mission , his comrade , the need for haste . he be dizzy , sick , faint , but he must not die , and he must not tarry , for his life mean many life that day . in an instant he be in his saddle and spur down the valley . ring the swift charger 's hoof over rock and reef , while the fire fly from the stroke of iron , and the loose stone shower up behind him . but his head be whirl round , the blood be gush from his brow , his temple , his mouth . ever keen and sharp be the deadly pain which shoot like a red-hot arrow through his side . he feel that his eye be glaze , his sense slip from him , his grasp upon the rein relax . then with one mighty effort , he call up all his strength for a single minute . stoop down , he loosen the , bind his knee tightly to his , twist his hand in the bridle , and then , put the gallant horse 's head for the mountain path , he dash the spur in and fall forward fainting with his face bury in the coarse , black mane . little could he ever remember of that wild ride . half conscious , but ever with the one thought beating in his mind , he goad the horse onwards , rush swiftly down steep ravine over huge boulder , along the edge of black abyss . dim memory he have of beetle cliff , of a group of hut with wonder face at the door , of foam , clatter water , and of a bristle of mountain beech . once , ere he have ride far , he hear behind him three deep , sullen shout , which tell him that his comrade have set their face to the foe once more . then all be blank , until he wake to find kindly blue english eye peer down upon him and to hear the bless sound of his country 's speech . they be but a forage hundred archer and as many their leader be , and he be not a man to bide idle when good blow be to be have not three league from him . a scout be send fly with a message to the camp , and , with his two hundred man , thunder off to the rescue . with them go , still bind to his saddle , still drip with blood , and swoon and recover , and swoon once again . on they ride , and on , until , at last , top a ridge , they look down upon the fateful valley . alas ! and alas ! for the sight that meet their eye . there , beneath them , be the hill , and from the high pinnacle there flaunt the yellow and white banner with the lion and the tower of the royal house of . up the long slope rush rank and rank of man exultant , shout , with wave pennon and brandish arm . over the whole summit be dense throng of knight , with no enemy that could be see to face them , save only that at one corner of the plateau an eddy and swirl amid the crowded mass seem to show that all resistance be not yet at an end . at the sight a deep groan of rage and of despair go up from the baffle rescuer , and , spur on their horse , they clatter down the long and wind path which lead to the valley beneath . but they be too late to avenge , as they have be too late to save . long ere they could gain the level ground , the spaniard , see them ride swiftly amid the rock , and be ignorant of their number , draw off from the capture hill , and , have secure their few prisoner , ride slowly in a long column , with and , out of the valley . their rear rank be already pass out of sight ere the new-comer be urge their pant , foam horse up the slope which have be the scene of that long draw and bloody fight . and a fearsome sight it be that meet their eye ! across the low end lie the dense heap of man and horse where the first have burst . above , the body of the dead and the , , and thick and thick , until they cover the whole ground two and three deep in one dreadful tangle of slaughter . above them lie the englishman in their line , even as they have stand , and higher yet upon the plateau a wild medley of the dead of all nation , where the last deadly grapple have leave them . in the further corner , under the shadow of a great rock , there crouch seven bowman , with great in the centre of wounded , weary , and in sorry case , but still , with their blood-stained weapon wave and their voice ring a welcome to their countryman . ride across to , while follow close behind him . " by ! " cry , " i have never see sign of so stern a fight , and i be right glad that we have be in time to save you . " " you have save more than us , " say , point to the banner which lean against the rock behind him . " you have do nobly , " cry the old free companion , gaze with a soldier 's admiration at the huge frame and bold face of the archer . " but why be it , my good fellow , that you sit upon this man . " " by the rood ! i have forget him , " answer , rise and drag from under him no less a person than the spanish caballero , . " this man , my fair lord , mean to me a new house , ten cow , one it be but a little grindstone , and i know not what besides ; so that i think it well to sit upon him , lest he should take a fancy to leave me . " " tell me , , " cry faintly : " where be my dear lord , ? " " he be dead , i fear . i see them throw his body across a horse and ride away with it , but i fear the life have go from him . " " now woe worth me ! and where be ? " " he spring upon a riderless horse and ride after to save him . i see them throng around him , and he be either take or slay . " " blow the bugle ! " cry , with a scowl brow . " we must back to camp , and ere three day i trust that we may see these spaniard again . i would fain have all in my company . " " we be of the , my fair lord , " say . " nay , the be here disband , " answer solemnly , look round him at the line of silent figure . " look to the brave squire , for i fear that he will never see the sun rise again . " it be a bright morning four month after that fatal fight in the spanish barranca . a blue heaven stretch above , a green rolling plain undulate below , intersect with and fleck with grazing sheep . the sun be yet low in the heaven , and the red cow stand in the long shadow of the elm , chew the cud and gaze with great vacant eye at two horseman who be spur it down the long white road which dip and curve away back to where the tower and pinnacle beneath the hill mark the old town of . of the rider one be young , graceful , and fair , clad in plain doublet and hosen of blue cloth , which serve to show his active and well-knit figure . a flat velvet cap be draw forward to keep the glare from his eye , and he ride with lip compress and anxious face , as one who have much care upon his mind . young as he be , and peaceful as be his dress , the dainty golden spur which twinkle upon his heel proclaim his knighthood , while a long seam upon his brow and a scar upon his temple give a manly grace to his refined and delicate countenance . his comrade be a large , red-headed man upon a great black horse , with a huge canvas bag sling from his , which jingle and clink with every movement of his steed . his broad , brown face be light up by a continual smile , and he look slowly from side to side with eye which twinkle and shine with delight . well might rejoice , for be he not back in his native , have he not 's five thousand crown rasping against his knee , and above all be he not himself squire now to , the young of lately knight by the sword of the himself , and esteem by the whole army as one of the most rise of the soldier of . for the last stand of the company have be tell throughout wherever a brave deed of arm be love , and honors have flow in upon the few who have survive it . for two month have waver betwixt death and life , with a break rib and a shattered head ; yet youth and strength and a cleanly life be all upon his side , and he awake from his long delirium to find that the war be over , that the spaniard and their ally have be crush at , and that the prince have himself hear the tale of his ride for succor and have come in person to his bedside to touch his shoulder with his sword and to insure that so brave and true a man should die , if he could not live , within the order of chivalry . the instant that he could set foot to ground have start in search of his lord , but no word could he hear of him , dead or alive , and he have come home now , in the hope of raise money upon his estate and so start upon his quest once more . landing at , he have hurry on with a mind full of care , for he have hear no word from since the short note which have announce his brother 's death . " by the rood ! " cry , look around him exultantly , " where have we see since we leave such noble cow , such fleecy sheep , grass so green , or a man so drunk as yonder rogue who lie in the gap of the hedge ? " " ah , , " answer wearily , " it be well for you , but i never think that my would be so sad a one . my heart be heavy for my dear lord and for , and i know not how i may break the news to the and to the , if they have not yet have tidings of it . " give a groan which make the horse shy . " it be indeed a black business , " say he . " but be not sad , for i shall give half these crown to my old mother , and half will i add to the money which you may have , and so we shall buy that yellow cog wherein we sail to , and in it we shall go forth and seek . " smile , but shake his head . " be he alive we should have have word of him ere now , " say he . " but what be this town before us ? " " why , it be ! " cry . " see the tower of the old gray church , and the long stretch of the nunnery . but here sit a very holy man , and i shall give him a crown for his prayer . " three large stone form a rough cot by the roadside , and beside it , bask in the sun , sit the hermit , with face , dull eye , and long wither hand . with cross ankle and sunken head , he sit as though all his life have pass out of him , with the bead slip slowly through his thin , yellow finger . behind him lie the narrow cell , and damp , comfortless , profitless and sordid . beyond it there lie amid the tree the hut of a laborer , the door open , and the single room expose to the view . the man ruddy and , stand lean upon the spade wherewith he have be at work upon the garden patch . from behind him come the ripple of a happy woman 's laughter , and two young urchin dart forth from the hut , and , while the mother , step out , lay her hand upon her husband 's arm and watch the gambol of the child . the hermit frown at the untoward noise which break upon his prayer , but his brow relax as he look upon the broad silver piece which hold out to him . " there lie the image of our past and of our future , " cry , as they ride on upon their way . " now , which be good , to till 's earth , to have happy face round one 's knee , and to love and be love , or to sit forever moan over one 's own soul , like a mother over a sick babe ? " " i know not about that , " say , " for it cast a great cloud over me when i think of such matter . but i know that my crown be well spend , for the man have the look of a very holy person . as to the other , there be nought holy about him that i could see , and it would be cheap for me to pray for myself than to give a crown to one who spend his day in dig for lettuce . " ere could answer there swing round the curve of the road a lady 's carriage draw by three horse abreast with a postilion upon the outer one . very fine and rich it be , with beam paint and gild , wheel and spoke carve in strange figure , and over all an arched cover of red and white tapestry . beneath its shade there sit a stout and elderly lady in a pink , lean back among a pile of cushion , and pluck out her eyebrow with a small pair of silver tweezers . none could seem more safe and secure and at her ease than this lady , yet here also be a symbol of human life , for in an instant , even as rein aside to let the carriage pass , a wheel fly out from among its fellow , and over it all , tapestry and one wild heap , with the horse plunging , the postilion shouting , and the lady scream from within . in an instant and be on foot , and have lift her forth all in a shake with fear , but little the bad for her mischance . " now woe worth me ! " she cry , " and ill fall on of ! for i tell him that the pin be loose , and yet he must needs gainsay me , like the foolish that he be . " " i trust that you have take no hurt , my fair lady , " say , conduct her to the bank , upon which have already place a cushion . " nay , i have have no , though i have lose my silver tweezers . now , ! do ever put breath into such a fool as of ? but i be much beholden to you , gentle sir . soldier be , as one may readily see . i be myself a soldier 's daughter , " she add , cast a somewhat languish glance at , " and my heart ever go out to a brave man . " " we be indeed fresh from , " quoth . " from , say you ? ah ! it be an ill and sorry thing that so many should throw away the life that give them . in sooth , it be bad for those who fall , but bad for those who bide behind . i have but now bid farewell to one who have lose all in this cruel war . " " and how that , lady ? " " she be a young damsel of these part , and she go now into a nunnery . ! it be not a year since she be the fair maid from to , and now it be more than i could abide to wait at to see her put the white veil upon her face , for she be make for a wife and not for the cloister . do you ever , gentle sir , hear of a body of man call ' the ' over yonder ? " " surely so , " cry both the comrade . " her father be the leader of it , and her lover serve under him as squire . have come that not one of the company be leave alive , and so , poor lamb , she have -- -- -- " " ! " cry , with catch breath , " be it the of whom you speak ? " " it be , in sooth . " " ! and in a nunnery ! do , then , the thought of her father 's death so move her ? " " her father ! " cry the lady , smile . " ; be a good daughter , but i think it be this young squire of whom i have hear who have make her turn her back upon the world . " " and i stand talk here ! " cry wildly . " come , , come ! " rush to his horse , he swing himself into the saddle , and be off down the road in a rolling cloud of dust as fast as his good steed could bear him . have be the rejoice amid the nun when the have crave admission into their be she not sole child and heiress of the old knight , with farm and fief which she could bring to the great nunnery ? long and earnest have be the talk of the gaunt lady abbess , in which she have conjure the young novice to turn forever from the world , and to rest her bruise heart under the broad and peaceful shelter of the church . and now , when all be settle , and when abbess and lady superior have have their will , it be but fitting that some pomp and show should mark the glad occasion . hence be it that the good burgher of be all in the street , that gay flag and flower brighten the path from the nunnery to the church , and that a long procession wind up to the old arched door lead up the bride to these spiritual nuptials . there be with the high gold crucifix , and the three , and the garb in white , who cast flower upon either side of them and sing sweetly the while . then , with four attendant , come the novice , her droop head wreathe with white blossom , and , behind , the abbess and her council of old nun , who be already count in their mind whether their own bailiff could manage the farm of , or whether a reeve would be need beneath him , to draw the utmost from these new possession which this young novice be about to bring them . but alas ! for plot and plan when love and youth and nature , and above all , fortune be array against them . who be this travel-stained youth who dare to ride so madly through the line of stare burgher ? why do he fling himself from his horse and stare so strangely about him ? see how he have rush through the , thrust aside , scatter the who sing so he stand before the novice with his hand , and his face shine , and the light of love in his gray eye . her foot be on the very lintel of the church , and yet he bar the she , she think no more of the wise word and holy rede of the lady abbess , but she have give a sob cry and have fall forward with his arm around her droop body and her wet cheek upon his breast . a sorry sight this for the gaunt abbess , an ill lesson too for the stainless who have ever be teach that the way of nature be the way of sin . but and care little for this . a dank , cold air come out from the black arch before them . without , the sun shine bright and the bird be sing amid the ivy on the droop beech . their choice be make , and they turn away hand-in-hand , with their back to the darkness and their face to the light . very quiet be the wedding in the old priory church at , where read the service , and there be few to see save the and , and a dozen bowman from the castle . the of have droop and pine for weary month , so that her face be harsh and less comely than before , yet she still hope on , for her lord have come through so many danger that she could scarce believe that he might be strike down at last . it have be her wish to start for and to search for him , but have persuade her to let him go in her place . there be much to look after , now that the land of be join to those of , and have promise her that if she would but bide with his wife he would never come back to again until he have gain some news , good or ill , of her lord and lover . the yellow cog have be engage , with in command , and a month after the wedding ride down to to see if she have come round yet from . on the way he pass the fishing village of 's , and mark that a little or brig be tack off the land , as though about to anchor there . on his way back , as he ride towards the village , he see that she have indeed anchor , and that many boat be round her , bear cargo to the shore . a from be deep there be an inn a little back from the road , very large and , with a great green bush hang upon a pole from one of the upper window . at this window he mark , as he ride up , that a man be seat who appear to be crane his neck in his direction . be still look up at him , when a woman come rush from the open door of the inn , and make as though she would climb a tree , look back the while with a laughing face . wonder what these doing might mean , tie his horse to a tree , and be walk amid the trunk towards the inn , when there shoot from the entrance a second woman who make also for the tree . close at her heel come a burly , man , who lean against the door-post and laugh loudly with his hand to his side , " ah , mes belle ! " he cry , " and be it thus you treat me ? ah , mes ! i swear by these that i would not hurt a hair of your pretty head ; but i have be among the black paynim , and , by my hilt ! it do me good to look at your english cheek . come , drink a stoup of muscadine with me , mes , for my heart be warm to be among again . " at the sight of the man have stand stare , but at the sound of his voice such a thrill of joy bubble up in his heart that he have to bite his lip to keep himself from shout outright . but a deep pleasure yet be in store . even as he look , the window above be push outwards , and the voice of the man whom he have see there come out from it . " , " cry the voice , " i have see just now a very worthy person come down the road , though my eye could scarce discern whether he carry . i pray you to wait upon him and tell him that a very humble knight of abide here , so that if he be in need of advancement , or have any small vow upon his soul , or desire to exalt his lady , i may help him to accomplish it . " at this order come shuffle forward amid the tree , and in an instant the two man be cling in each other 's arm , laugh and shout and pat each other in their delight ; while old come run with his sword , under the impression that some small bickering have break out , only to embrace and be embrace himself , until all three be hoarse with their question and outcry and congratulation . on their journey home through the wood learn their wondrous story : how , when come to his sense , he with his have be hurry to the coast , and convey by sea to their captor 's castle ; how upon the way they have be take by a rover , and how they exchange their light captivity for a seat on a galley bench and hard labor at the pirate 's oar ; how , in the port at , have slay the moorish captain , and have swim with to a small coaster which they have take , and so make their way to with a rich cargo to reward them for their toil . all this listen to , until the dark keep of towered above them in the gloaming , and they see the red sun lie athwart the ripple avon . no need to speak of the glad heart at that night , nor of the rich offering from out that moorish cargo which find their way to the chapel of . live for many year , full of honor and laden with every blessing . he ride no more to the war , but he find his way to every joust within thirty mile ; and the youth treasure it as the high honor when a word of praise fall from him as to their management of their horse , or their breaking of their lance . so he live and so he die , the most revere and the happy man in all his native shire . for and for his beautiful bride the future have also naught but what be good . twice he fight in , and come back each time lade with honors . a high place at court be give to him , and he spend many year at under the second and the fourth he receive the honor of the , and win the name of be a brave soldier , a true-hearted gentleman , and a great lover and patron of every art and science which refine or ennoble life . as to , he take unto himself a village maid , and settle in , where his five thousand crown make him the rich franklin for many mile around . for many year he drink his ale every night at the " , " which be now keep by his friend , who have wed the good widow to whom he have commit his plunder . the strong man and the bowman of the country round use to drop in there of an evening to wrestle a fall with or to shoot a round with ; but , though a silver shilling be to be the prise of the victory , it have never be report that any man earn much money in that fashion . so they live , these man , in their own lusty , cheery and rough , but honest , kindly and true . let us thank if we have outgrow their vice . let us pray to that we may ever hold their virtue . the sky may darken , and the cloud may gather , and again the day may come when may have sore need of her child , on whatever shore of the sea they be find . shall they not muster at her call ?