in the year @card@ i take my degree of of of the of , and proceed to to go through the course prescribe for surgeon in the army . have complete my study there , i be duly attach to the as . the regiment be station in at the time , and before i could join it , the second afghan war have break out . on landing at , i learn that my corps have advance through the pass , and be already deep in the enemy 's country . i follow , however , with many other officer who be in the same situation as myself , and succeed in reach in safety , where i find my regiment , and at once enter upon my new duty . the campaign bring honour and promotion to many , but for me it have nothing but misfortune and disaster . i be remove from my brigade and attach to the , with whom i serve at the fatal battle of . there i be strike on the shoulder by a bullet , which shatter the bone and graze the subclavian artery . i should have fall into the hand of the murderous have it not be for the devotion and courage show by , my orderly , who throw me across a , and succeed in bring me safely to the british line . wear with pain , and weak from the prolonged hardship which i have undergo , i be remove , with a great train of wounded sufferer , to the base hospital at . here i rally , and have already improve so far as to be able to walk about the ward , and even to bask a little upon the verandah , when i be strike down by enteric fever , that curse of our indian possession . for month my life be despair of , and when at last i come to myself and become convalescent , i be so weak and emaciate that a medical board determine that not a day should be lose in send me back to . i be dispatch , accordingly , in the troopship " , " and land a month later on jetty , with my health irretrievably ruin , but with permission from a paternal government to spend the next nine month in attempt to improve it . i have neither kith nor kin in , and be therefore as free as as free as an income of eleven shilling and sixpence a day will permit a man to be . under such circumstance , i naturally gravitate to , that great cesspool into which all the lounger and idler of the empire be irresistibly drain . there i stay for some time at a private hotel in the , lead a comfortless , meaningless existence , and spend such money as i have , considerably more freely than i ought . so alarming do the state of my finance become , that i soon realize that i must either leave the metropolis and rusticate somewhere in the country , or that i must make a complete alteration in my style of living . choose the latter alternative , i begin by make up my mind to leave the hotel , and to take up my quarter in some less pretentious and less expensive domicile . on the very day that i have come to this conclusion , i be stand at the , when some one tap me on the shoulder , and turn round i recognize young , who have be a dresser under me at . the sight of a friendly face in the great wilderness of be a pleasant thing indeed to a lonely man . in old day have never be a particular crony of mine , but now i hail him with enthusiasm , and he , in his turn , appear to be delight to see me . in the exuberance of my joy , i ask him to lunch with me at the , and we start off together in a hansom . " whatever have you be do with yourself , ? " he ask in undisguised wonder , as we rattle through the crowded street . " you be as thin as a lath and as brown as a nut . " i give him a short sketch of my adventure , and have hardly conclude it by the time that we reach our destination . " poor devil ! " he say , , after he have listen to my misfortune . " what be you up to now ? " " look for lodging . " 3 i answer . " try to solve the problem as to whether it be possible to get comfortable room at a reasonable price . " " that be a strange thing , " remark my companion ; " you be the second man that have use that expression to me . " " and who be the first ? " i ask . " a fellow who be work at the chemical laboratory up at the hospital . he be bemoan himself this morning because he could not get someone to go half with him in some nice room which he have find , and which be too much for his purse . " " by ! " i cry , " if he really want someone to share the room and the expense , i be the very man for him . i should prefer have a partner to be alone . " look rather strangely at me over his . " you do n't know yet , " he say ; " perhaps you would not care for him as a constant companion . " " why , what be there against him ? " " oh , i do n't say there be anything against him . he be a little queer in his enthusiast in some branch of science . as far as i know he be a decent fellow enough . " " a medical student , i suppose ? " say " have no idea what he intend to go in for . i believe he be well up in anatomy , and he be a first-class chemist ; but , as far as i know , he have never take out any systematic medical class . his study be very desultory and eccentric , but he have amass a lot of way knowledge which would astonish his professor . " " do you never ask him what he be go in for ? " i ask . " no ; he be not a man that it be easy to draw out , though he can be communicative enough when the fancy seize him . " " i should like to meet him , " i say . " if i be to lodge with anyone , i should prefer a man of studious and quiet habit . i be not strong enough yet to stand much noise or excitement . i have enough of both in to last me for the remainder of my natural existence . how could i meet this friend of yours ? " " he be sure to be at the laboratory , " return my companion . " he either avoid the place for week , or else he work there from morning to night . if you like , we shall drive round together after luncheon . " " certainly , " i answer , and the conversation drift away into other channel . as we make our way to the hospital after leave the , give me a few more particular about the gentleman whom i propose to take as a . " you must n't blame me if you do n't get on with him , " he say ; " i know nothing more of him than i have learn from meet him occasionally in the laboratory . you propose this arrangement , so you must not hold me responsible . " " if we do n't get on it will be easy to part company , " i answer . " it seem to me , , " i add , look hard at my companion , " that you have some reason for wash your hand of the matter . be this fellow 's temper so formidable , or what be it ? do n't be mealy-mouthed about it . " " it be not easy to express the inexpressible , " he answer with a laugh . " be a little too scientific for my approach to cold-bloodedness . i could imagine his give a friend a little pinch of the late vegetable alkaloid , not out of malevolence , you understand , but simply out of a spirit of inquiry in order to have an accurate idea of the effect . to do him justice , i think that he would take it himself with the same readiness . he appear to have a passion for definite and exact knowledge . " " very right too . " " yes , but it may be push to excess . when it come to beat the subject in the with a stick , it be certainly take rather a bizarre shape . " " beat the subject ! " " yes , to verify how far bruise may be produce after death . i see him at it with my own eye . " " and yet you say he be not a medical student ? " " no. know what the object of his study be . but here we be , and you must form your own impression about him . " as he speak , we turn down a narrow lane and pass through a small , which open into a wing of the great hospital . it be familiar ground to me , and i need no guiding as we ascend the bleak stone staircase and make our way down the long corridor with its vista of whitewash wall and door . near the further end a low arched passage branch away from it and lead to the chemical laboratory . this be a lofty chamber , line and litter with countless bottle . broad , low table be scatter about , which bristle with retort , test-tube , and little bunsen lamp , with their blue flicker flame . there be only one student in the room , who be bend over a distant table absorb in his work . at the sound of our step he glance round and spring to his foot with a cry of pleasure . " i have find it ! i have find it , " he shout to my companion , run towards us with a test-tube in his hand . " i have find a which be precipitate by , 4 and by nothing else . " have he discover a gold mine , great delight could not have shine upon his feature . " , , " say , introduce us . " how be you ? " he say cordially , grip my hand with a strength for which i should hardly have give him credit . " you have be in , i perceive . " " how on earth do you know that ? " i ask in astonishment . " never mind , " say he , chuckle to himself . " the question now be about . no doubt you see the significance of this discovery of mine ? " " it be interesting , chemically , no doubt , " i answer , " but practically -- -- -- " " why , man , it be the most practical discovery for year . do n't you see that it give us an infallible test for blood stain . come over here now ! " he seize me by the in his eagerness , and draw me over to the table at which he have be work . " let us have some fresh blood , " he say , dig a long bodkin into his finger , and draw off the result drop of blood in a chemical pipette . " now , i add this small quantity of blood to a litre of water . you perceive that the result mixture have the appearance of pure water . the proportion of blood can be more than one in a million . i have no doubt , however , that we shall be able to obtain the characteristic reaction . " as he speak , he throw into the vessel a few white crystal , and then add some drop of a transparent fluid . in an instant the content assume a dull mahogany colour , and a brownish dust be precipitate to the bottom of the glass jar . " ! ! " he cry , clap his hand , and look as delighted as a child with a new toy . " what do you think of that ? " " it seem to be a very delicate test , " i remark . " beautiful ! beautiful ! the old test be very clumsy and uncertain . so be the microscopic examination for blood corpuscle . the latter be valueless if the stain be a few hour old . now , this appear to act as well whether the blood be old or new . have this test be invent , there be hundred of man now walk the earth who would long ago have pay the penalty of their crime . " " indeed ! " i murmur . " criminal case be continually hinge upon that one point . a man be suspect of a crime month perhaps after it have be commit . his linen or clothes be examine , and brownish stain discover upon them . be they blood stain , or mud stain , or rust stain , or fruit stain , or what be they ? that be a question which have puzzle many an expert , and why ? because there be no reliable test . now we have the ' test , and there will no longer be any difficulty . " his eye fairly glitter as he speak , and he put his hand over his heart and bow as if to some applaud crowd conjure up by his imagination . " you be to be congratulate , " i remark , considerably surprise at his enthusiasm . " there be the case of at last year . he would certainly have be hang have this test be in existence . then there be of , and the notorious , and of , and of . i could name a score of case in which it would have be decisive . " " you seem to be a walk calendar of crime , " say with a laugh . " you might start a paper on those line . call it ' of the . ' " " very interesting reading it might be make , too , " remark , stick a small piece of plaster over the prick on his finger . " i have to be careful , " he continue , turn to me with a smile , " for i dabble with poison a good deal . " he hold out his hand as he speak , and i notice that it be all mottle over with similar piece of plaster , and discolour with strong acid . " we come here on business , " say , sit down on a high three-legged stool , and push another one in my direction with his foot . " my friend here want to take diggings , and as you be complain that you could get no one to go half with you , i think that i have well bring you together . " seem delighted at the idea of share his room with me . " i have my eye on a suite in , " he say , " which would suit us down to the ground . you do n't mind the smell of strong tobacco , i hope ? " " i always smoke ' ship be ' myself , " i answer . " that be good enough . i generally have chemical about , and occasionally do experiment . would that annoy you ? " " by no mean . " " let me be my other shortcoming . i get in the dump at time , and do n't open my mouth for day on end . you must not think i be sulky when i do that . just let me alone , and i will soon be right . what have you to confess now ? it be just as well for two fellow to know the bad of one another before they begin to live together . " i laugh at this cross-examination . " i keep a bull pup , " i say , " and i object to row because my nerve be shake , and i get up at all sort of ungodly hour , and i be extremely lazy . i have another set of vice when i be well , but those be the principal one at present . " " do you include in your category of row ? " he ask , anxiously . " it depend on the player , " i answer . " a well-play violin be a treat for the one -- -- -- " " oh , that be all right , " he cry , with a merry laugh . " i think we may consider the thing as be , if the room be agreeable to you . " " when shall we see them ? " " call for me here at noon , and we will go together and settle everything , " he answer . " all exactly , " say i , shake his hand . we leave him work among his chemical , and we walk together towards my hotel . " by the way , " i ask suddenly , stop and turn upon , " how the deuce do he know that i have come from ? " my companion smile an smile . " that be just his little peculiarity , " he say . " a good many people have want to know how he find thing out . " " oh ! a mystery be it ? " i cry , rub my hand . " this be very piquant . i be much oblige to you for bring us together . ' the proper study of mankind be man , ' you know . " " you must study him , then , " say , as he bid me good-bye . " you will find him a knotty problem , though . i will wager he learn more about you than you about him . good-bye . " " good-bye , " i answer , and stroll on to my hotel , considerably interested in my new acquaintance . we meet next day as he have arrange , and inspect the room at no. , 5 , of which he have speak at our meeting . they consist of a couple of comfortable and a single large airy sitting-room , cheerfully furnish , and illuminate by two broad window . so desirable in every way be the apartment , and so moderate do the term seem when divide between us , that the bargain be conclude upon the spot , and we at once enter into possession . that very evening i move my thing round from the hotel , and on the follow morning follow me with several box and portmanteau . for a day or two we be busily employ in unpack and lay out our property to the good advantage . that do , we gradually begin to settle down and to accommodate ourselves to our new surroundings . be certainly not a difficult man to live with . he be quiet in his way , and his habit be regular . it be rare for him to be up after ten at night , and he have invariably breakfast and go out before i rise in the morning . sometimes he spend his day at the chemical laboratory , sometimes in the , and occasionally in long walk , which appear to take him into the low portion of the . nothing could exceed his energy when the work fit be upon him ; but now and again a reaction would seize him , and for day on end he would lie upon the sofa in the sitting-room , hardly utter a word or move a muscle from morning to night . on these occasion i have notice such a dreamy , vacant expression in his eye , that i might have suspect him of be addict to the use of some narcotic , have not the temperance and cleanliness of his whole life forbid such a notion . as the week go by , my interest in him and my curiosity as to his aim in life , gradually deepen and increase . his very person and appearance be such as to strike the attention of the most casual observer . in height he be rather over six foot , and so excessively lean that he seem to be considerably tall . his eye be sharp and piercing , save during those interval of torpor to which i have allude ; and his thin , nose give his whole expression an air of alertness and decision . his chin , too , have the prominence and squareness which mark the man of determination . his hand be invariably blot with ink and stain with chemical , yet he be possess of extraordinary delicacy of touch , as i frequently have occasion to observe when i watch him manipulate his fragile philosophical instrument . the reader may set me down as a hopeless busybody , when i confess how much this man stimulate my curiosity , and how often i endeavour to break through the reticence which he show on all that concern himself . before pronounce judgment , however , be it remember , how be my life , and how little there be to engage my attention . my health forbid me from venture out unless the weather be exceptionally genial , and i have no friend who would call upon me and break the monotony of my daily existence . under these circumstance , i eagerly hail the little mystery which hang around my companion , and spend much of my time in endeavour to unravel it . he be not study medicine . he have himself , in reply to a question , confirm 's opinion upon that point . neither do he appear to have pursue any course of reading which might fit him for a degree in science or any other recognize portal which would give him an entrance into the learn world . yet his zeal for certain study be remarkable , and within eccentric limit his knowledge be so extraordinarily ample and minute that his observation have fairly astound me . surely no man would work so hard or attain such precise information unless he have some definite end in view . desultory reader be seldom remarkable for the exactness of their learning . no man burden his mind with small matter unless he have some very good reason for do so . his ignorance be as remarkable as his knowledge . of contemporary literature , philosophy and politics he appear to know next to nothing . upon my quote , he inquire in the naive way who he might be and what he have do . my surprise reach a climax , however , when i find incidentally that he be ignorant of the copernican theory and of the composition of the . that any civilized human be in this nineteenth century should not be aware that the earth travel round the sun appear to be to me such an extraordinary fact that i could hardly realize it . " you appear to be astonish , " he say , smile at my expression of surprise . " now that i do know it i shall do my good to forget it . " " to forget it ! " " you see , " he explain , " i consider that a man 's brain originally be like a little empty attic , and you have to stock it with such furniture as you choose . a fool take in all the lumber of every sort that he come across , so that the knowledge which might be useful to him get crowd out , or at good be jumble up with a lot of other thing so that he have a difficulty in lay his hand upon it . now the skilful workman be very careful indeed as to what he take into his . he will have nothing but the tool which may help him in do his work , but of these he have a large assortment , and all in the most perfect order . it be a mistake to think that that little room have elastic wall and can distend to any extent . depend upon it there come a time when for every addition of knowledge you forget something that you know before . it be of the high importance , therefore , not to have useless fact elbow out the useful one . " " but the ! " i protest . " what the deuce be it to me ? " he interrupt impatiently ; " you say that we go round the sun . if we go round the moon it would not make a pennyworth of difference to me or to my work . " i be on the point of ask him what that work might be , but something in his manner show me that the question would be an unwelcome one . i ponder over our short conversation , however , and endeavour to draw my deduction from it . he say that he would acquire no knowledge which do not bear upon his object . therefore all the knowledge which he possess be such as would be useful to him . i enumerate in my own mind all the various point upon which he have show me that he be exceptionally well-informed . i even take a pencil and jot them down . i could not help smile at the document when i have complete it . it run in this -- limit . 1 . knowledge of . -- . 2 . philosophy . -- . 3 . astronomy . -- . 4 . politics . -- . 5 . botany . -- . well up in belladonna , opium , and poison generally . know nothing of practical gardening . 6 . geology . -- , but limited . tell at a glance different soil from each other . after walk have show me splash upon his trouser , and tell me by their colour and consistence in what part of he have receive them . 7 . chemistry . -- . 8 . anatomy . -- , but . 9 . sensational literature . -- . he appear to know every detail of every horror perpetrate in the century . @card@ . play the violin well . @card@ . be an expert singlestick player , boxer , and swordsman . @card@ . have a good practical knowledge of british law . when i have get so far in my list i throw it into the fire in despair . " if i can only find what the fellow be drive at by reconcile all these accomplishment , and discover a calling which need them all , " i say to myself , " i may as well give up the attempt at once . " i see that i have allude above to his power upon the violin . these be very remarkable , but as eccentric as all his other accomplishment . that he could play piece , and difficult piece , i know well , because at my request he have play me some of 's , and other favourite . when leave to himself , however , he would seldom produce any music or attempt any recognize air . lean back in his of an evening , he would close his eye and scrape carelessly at the fiddle which be throw across his knee . sometimes the chord be sonorous and melancholy . occasionally they be fantastic and cheerful . clearly they reflect the thought which possess him , but whether the music aid those thought , or whether the playing be simply the result of a whim or fancy be more than i could determine . i might have rebel against these exasperate solo have it not be that he usually terminate them by play in quick succession a whole series of my favourite air as a slight compensation for the trial upon my patience . during the first week or so we have no caller , and i have begin to think that my companion be as friendless a man as i be myself . presently , however , i find that he have many acquaintance , and those in the most different class of society . there be one little sallow , dark-eyed fellow who be introduce to me as , and who come three or four time in a single week . one morning a young girl call , fashionably dress , and stay for half an hour or more . the same afternoon bring a grey-headed , seedy visitor , look like a pedlar , who appear to me to be much excite , and who be closely follow by a elderly woman . on another occasion an old white-haired gentleman have an interview with my companion ; and on another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform . when any of these nondescript individual put in an appearance , use to beg for the use of the sitting-room , and i would retire to my . he always apologize to me for put me to this inconvenience . " i have to use this room as a place of business , " he say , " and these people be my client . " again i have an opportunity of ask him a point blank question , and again my delicacy prevent me from force another man to confide in me . i imagine at the time that he have some strong reason for not allude to it , but he soon dispel the idea by come round to the subject of his own accord . it be upon the 4th of , as i have good reason to remember , that i rise somewhat earlier than usual , and find that have not yet finish his breakfast . the landlady have become so accustomed to my late habit that my place have not be lay nor my coffee prepare . with the unreasonable petulance of mankind i ring the bell and give a curt intimation that i be ready . then i pick up a magazine from the table and attempt to while away the time with it , while my companion munch silently at his toast . one of the article have a pencil mark at the heading , and i naturally begin to run my eye through it . its somewhat ambitious title be " the book of , " and it attempt to show how much an observant man might learn by an accurate and systematic examination of all that come in his way . it strike me as be a remarkable mixture of shrewdness and of absurdity . the reasoning be close and intense , but the deduction appear to me to be far-fetched and exaggerated . the writer claim by a momentary expression , a twitch of a muscle or a glance of an eye , to fathom a man 's inmost thought . deceit , accord to him , be an impossibility in the case of one train to observation and analysis . his conclusion be as infallible as so many proposition of . so startling would his result appear to the uninitiated that until they learn the process by which he have arrive at them they might well consider him as a necromancer . " from a drop of water , " say the writer , " a logician could infer the possibility of an or a without have see or hear of one or the other . so all life be a great chain , the nature of which be know whenever we be show a single link of it . like all other art , the science of and be one which can only be acquire by long and patient study nor be life long enough to allow any mortal to attain the high possible perfection in it . before turn to those moral and mental aspect of the matter which present the great difficulty , let the begin by master more elementary problem . let him , on meet a , learn at a glance to distinguish the history of the man , and the trade or profession to which he belong . puerile as such an exercise may seem , it sharpen the faculty of observation , and teach one where to look and what to look for . by a man 's finger nail , by his , by his boot , by his trouser knee , by the callosity of his forefinger and thumb , by his expression , by his shirt each of these thing a man 's calling be plainly reveal . that all unite should fail to enlighten the competent in any case be almost inconceivable . " " what ineffable twaddle ! " i cry , slap the magazine down on the table , " i never read such rubbish in my life . " " what be it ? " ask . " why , this article , " i say , point at it with my egg spoon as i sit down to my breakfast . " i see that you have read it since you have mark it . i do n't deny that it be smartly write . it irritate me though . it be evidently the theory of some lounger who evolve all these neat little paradox in the seclusion of his own study . it be not practical . i should like to see him clap down in a third class carriage on the underground , and ask to give the trade of all his fellow-traveller . i would lay a thousand to one against him . " " you would lose your money , " remark calmly . " as for the article i write it myself . " " you ! " " yes , i have a turn both for observation and for deduction . the theory which i have express there , and which appear to you to be so chimerical be really extremely practical that i depend upon them for my bread and cheese . " " and how ? " i ask involuntarily . " well , i have a trade of my own . i suppose i be the only one in the world . i be a consulting detective , if you can understand what that be . here in we have lot of government detective and lot of private one . when these fellow be at fault they come to me , and i manage to put them on the right scent . they lie all the evidence before me , and i be generally able , by the help of my knowledge of the history of crime , to set them straight . there be a strong family resemblance about misdeed , and if you have all the detail of a thousand at your finger end , it be odd if you ca n't unravel the thousand and first . be a well-known detective . he get himself into a fog recently over a forgery case , and that be what bring him here . " " and these other people ? " " they be mostly send on by private inquiry agency . they be all people who be in trouble about something , and want a little enlightening . i listen to their story , they listen to my comment , and then i pocket my fee . " " but do you mean to say , " i say , " that without leave your room you can unravel some knot which other man can make nothing of , although they have see every detail for themselves ? " " quite so . i have a kind of intuition that way . now and again a case turn up which be a little more complex . then i have to bustle about and see thing with my own eye . you see i have a lot of special knowledge which i apply to the problem , and which facilitate matter wonderfully . those rule of deduction lay down in that article which arouse your scorn , be invaluable to me in practical work . observation with me be second nature . you appear to be surprise when i tell you , on our first meeting , that you have come from . " " you be tell , no doubt . " " nothing of the sort . i know you come from . from long habit the train of thought run so swiftly through my mind , that i arrive at the conclusion without be conscious of intermediate step . there be such step , however . the train of reasoning run , ' here be a gentleman of a medical type , but with the air of a military man . clearly an army doctor , then . he have just come from the tropic , for his face be dark , and that be not the natural tint of his skin , for his wrist be fair . he have undergo hardship and sickness , as his haggard face say clearly . his left arm have be injure . he hold it in a stiff and unnatural manner . where in the tropic could an english army doctor have see much hardship and get his arm wound ? clearly in . ' the whole train of thought do not occupy a second . i then remark that you come from , and you be astonish . " " it be simple enough as you explain it , " i say , smile . " you remind me of 's . i have no idea that such individual do exist outside of storey . " rise and light his pipe . " no doubt you think that you be compliment me in compare me to , " he observe . " now , in my opinion , be a very inferior fellow . that trick of his of break in on his friend ' thought with an apropos remark after a quarter of an hour 's silence be really very showy and superficial . he have some analytical genius , no doubt ; but he be by no mean such a phenomenon as appear to imagine . " " have you read 's work ? " i ask . " do come up to your idea of a detective ? " sniff sardonically . " be a miserable bungler , " he say , in an angry voice ; " he have only one thing to recommend him , and that be his energy . that book make me positively ill . the question be how to identify an unknown prisoner . i could have do it in hour . take six month or so . it might be make a for detective to teach them what to avoid . " i feel rather indignant at have two character whom i have admire treat in this cavalier style . i walk over to the window , and stand look out into the busy street . " this fellow may be very clever , " i say to myself , " but he be certainly very conceited . " " there be no crime and no criminal in these day , " he say , querulously . " what be the use of have brain in our profession . i know well that i have it in me to make my name famous . no man life or have ever live who have bring the same amount of study and of natural talent to the detection of crime which i have do . and what be the result ? there be no crime to detect , or , at most , some bungling villainy with a motive so transparent that even a official can see through it . " i be still annoy at his bumptious style of conversation . i think it well to change the topic . " i wonder what that fellow be look for ? " i ask , point to a stalwart , individual who be walk slowly down the other side of the street , look anxiously at the number . he have a large blue envelope in his hand , and be evidently the bearer of a message . " you mean the retire sergeant of , " say . " brag and bounce ! " think i to myself . " he know that i can verify his guess . " the thought have hardly pass through my mind when the man whom we be watch catch sight of the number on our door , and run rapidly across the roadway . we hear a loud knock , a deep voice below , and heavy step ascend the stair . " for , " he say , step into the room and hand my friend the letter . here be an opportunity of take the conceit out of him . he little think of this when he make that random shot . " may i ask , my lad , " i say , in the bland voice , " what your trade may be ? " " commissionaire , sir , " he say , gruffly . " uniform away for repair . " " and you be ? " i ask , with a slightly malicious glance at my companion . " a sergeant , sir , , sir . no answer ? right , sir . " he click his heel together , raise his hand in a salute , and be go . that i be considerably startle by this fresh proof of the practical nature of my companion 's theory . my respect for his power of analysis increase wondrously . there still remain some lurk suspicion in my mind , however , that the whole thing be a pre-arrange episode , intend to dazzle me , though what earthly object he could have in take me in be past my comprehension . when i look at him he have finish read the note , and his eye have assume the vacant , lack-lustre expression which show mental abstraction . " how in the world do you deduce that ? " i ask . " deduce what ? " say he , petulantly . " why , that he be a retire sergeant of . " " i have no time for trifle , " he answer , brusquely ; then with a smile , " my rudeness . you break the thread of my thought ; but perhaps it be as well . so you actually be not able to see that that man be a sergeant of ? " " no , indeed . " " it be easy to know it than to explain why i know it . if you be ask to prove that two and two make four , you might find some difficulty , and yet you be quite sure of the fact . even across the street i could see a great blue anchor tattoo on the back of the fellow 's hand . that smack of the sea . he have a military carriage , however , and regulation side whisker . there we have the marine . he be a man with some amount of self-importance and a certain air of command . you must have observe the way in which he hold his head and swing his cane . a steady , respectable , middle-aged man , too , on the face of fact which lead me to believe that he have be a sergeant . " " wonderful ! " i ejaculate . " commonplace , " say , though i think from his expression that he be please at my evident surprise and admiration . " i say just now that there be no criminal . it appear that i be at this ! " he throw me over the note which the commissionaire have bring . 7 " why , " i cry , as i cast my eye over it , " this be terrible ! " " it do seem to be a little out of the common , " he remark , calmly . " would you mind read it to me aloud ? " this be the letter which i read to him -- -- -- " . , -- - " there have be a bad business during the night at 3 , , off the . our man on the beat see a light there about two in the morning , and as the house be an empty one , suspect that something be amiss . he find the door open , and in the front room , which be bare of furniture , discover the body of a gentleman , well dress , and have card in his pocket bear the name of ' , , , ' there have be no robbery , nor be there any evidence as to how the man meet his death . there be mark of blood in the room , but there be no wound upon his person . we be at a loss as to how he come into the empty house ; indeed , the whole affair be a puzzler . if you can come round to the house any time before twelve , you will find me there . i have leave everything in quo until i hear from you . if you be unable to come i shall give you full detail , and would esteem it a great kindness if you would favour me with your opinion . yours faithfully , " . " " be the smart of the , " my friend remark ; " he and be the pick of a bad lot . they be both quick and energetic , but so . they have their knife into one another , too . they be as jealous as a pair of professional beauty . there will be some fun over this case if they be both put upon the scent . " i be amaze at the calm way in which he ripple on . " surely there be not a moment to be lose , " i cry , " shall i go and order you a cab ? " " i be not sure about whether i shall go . i be the most incurably lazy devil that ever stand in shoe be , when the fit be on me , for i can be spry enough at time . " " why , it be just such a chance as you have be long for . " " my dear fellow , what do it matter to me . suppose i unravel the whole matter , you may be sure that , , and will pocket all the credit . that come of be an unofficial personage . " " but he beg you to help him . " " yes . he know that i be his superior , and acknowledge it to me ; but he would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any third person . however , we may as well go and have a look . i shall work it out on my own hook . i may have a laugh at them if i have nothing else . come on ! " he hustle on his overcoat , and bustle about in a way that show that an energetic fit have supersede the apathetic one . " get your hat , " he say . " you wish me to come ? " " yes , if you have nothing well to do . " a minute later we be both in a hansom , drive furiously for the . it be a foggy , cloudy morning , and a veil hang over the , look like the reflection of the street beneath . my companion be in the good of spirit , and prattle away about fiddle , and the difference between a stradivarius and an . as for myself , i be silent , for the dull weather and the melancholy business upon which we be engage , depress my spirit . " you do n't seem to give much thought to the matter in hand , " i say at last , interrupt ' musical disquisition . " no datum yet , " he answer . " it be a capital mistake to theorize before you have all the evidence . it bias the judgment . " " you will have your datum soon , " i remark , point with my finger ; " this be the , and that be the house , if i be not very much mistake . " " so it be . stop , driver , stop ! " we be still a hundred yard or so from it , but he insist upon our alight , and we finish our journey upon foot . number 3 , wear an ill-omened and minatory look . it be one of four which stand back some little way from the street , two be occupy and two empty . the latter look out with three tier of vacant melancholy window , which be blank and dreary , save that here and there a " to let " card have develop like a cataract upon the blear pane . a small garden sprinkle over with a scattered eruption of sickly plant separate each of these house from the street , and be traverse by a narrow pathway , yellowish in colour , and consist apparently of a mixture of clay and of gravel . the whole place be very sloppy from the rain which have fall through the night . the garden be bound by a three-foot brick wall with a fringe of wood rail upon the top , and against this wall be lean a stalwart police constable , surround by a small knot of loafer , who crane their neck and strain their eye in the vain hope of catch some glimpse of the proceeding within . i have imagine that would at once have hurry into the house and plunge into a study of the mystery . nothing appear to be further from his intention . with an air of nonchalance which , under the circumstance , seem to me to border upon affectation , he lounge up and down the pavement , and gaze vacantly at the ground , the sky , the opposite house and the line of railing . have finish his scrutiny , he proceed slowly down the path , or rather down the fringe of grass which flank the path , keep his eye rivet upon the ground . twice he stop , and once i see him smile , and hear him utter an exclamation of satisfaction . there be many mark of footstep upon the wet clayey soil , but since the police have be come and go over it , i be unable to see how my companion could hope to learn anything from it . still i have have such extraordinary evidence of the quickness of his perceptive faculty , that i have no doubt that he could see a great deal which be hide from me . at the door of the house we be meet by a tall , , flaxen-haired man , with a notebook in his hand , who rush forward and wring my companion 's hand with effusion . " it be indeed kind of you to come , " he say , " i have have everything leave untouched . " " except that ! " my friend answer , point at the pathway . " if a herd of buffalo have pass along there could not be a great mess . no doubt , however , you have draw your own conclusion , , before you permit this . " " i have have so much to do inside the house , " the detective say evasively . " my colleague , , be here . i have rely upon him to look after this . " glance at me and raise his eyebrow sardonically . " with two such man as yourself and upon the ground , there will not be much for a third party to find out , " he say . rub his hand in a self-satisfied way . " i think we have do all that can be do , " he answer ; " it be a queer case though , and i know your taste for such thing . " " you do not come here in a cab ? " ask . " no , sir . " " nor ? " " no , sir . " " then let us go and look at the room . " with which inconsequent remark he stride on into the house , follow by , whose feature express his astonishment . a short passage , bare plank and dusty , lead to the kitchen and office . two door open out of it to the left and to the right . one of these have obviously be close for many week . the other belong to the dining-room , which be the apartment in which the mysterious affair have occur . walk in , and i follow him with that subdued feeling at my heart which the presence of death inspire . it be a large square room , look all the large from the absence of all furniture . a vulgar flare paper adorn the wall , but it be blotch in place with mildew , and here and there great strip have become detach and hang down , expose the yellow plaster beneath . opposite the door be a showy fireplace , surmount by a mantelpiece of imitation white marble . on one corner of this be stick the stump of a red wax candle . the solitary window be so dirty that the light be hazy and uncertain , give a dull grey tinge to everything , which be intensify by the thick layer of dust which coat the whole apartment . all these detail i observe afterwards . at present my attention be centre upon the single grim motionless figure which lie stretch upon the board , with vacant sightless eye stare up at the discolour ceiling . it be that of a man about or year of age , middle-sized , broad shoulder , with crisp curling black hair , and a short stubbly beard . he be dress in a heavy broadcloth frock coat and waistcoat , with light-coloured trouser , and immaculate collar and cuff . a top hat , well brush and trim , be place upon the floor beside him . his hand be clench and his arm throw abroad , while his low limb be interlock as though his death struggle have be a grievous one . on his rigid face there stand an expression of horror , and as it seem to me , of hatred , such as i have never see upon human feature . this malignant and terrible contortion , combine with the low forehead , blunt nose , and prognathous jaw give the dead man a singularly and appearance , which be increase by his writhe , unnatural posture . i have see death in many form , but never have it appear to me in a more fearsome aspect than in that dark grimy apartment , which look out upon one of the main artery of suburban . , lean and as ever , be stand by the doorway , and greet my companion and myself . " this case will make a stir , sir , " he remark . " it beat anything i have see , and i be no chicken . " " there be no clue ? " say . " none at all , " chime in . approach the body , and , kneel down , examine it intently . " you be sure that there be no wound ? " he ask , point to numerous gout and splash of blood which lie all round . " positive ! " cry both detective . " then , of course , this blood belong to a second presumably the murderer , if murder have be commit . it remind me of the circumstance attendant on the death of , in , in the year ' @card@ . do you remember the case , ? " " no , sir . " " read it really should . there be nothing new under the sun . it have all be do before . " as he speak , his nimble finger be fly here , there , and everywhere , feeling , press , unbutton , examine , while his eye wear the same far-away expression which i have already remark upon . so swiftly be the examination make , that one would hardly have guess the minuteness with which it be conduct . finally , he sniff the dead man 's lip , and then glance at the sole of his patent leather boot . " he have not be move at all ? " he ask . " no more than be necessary for the purpose of our examination . " " you can take him to the mortuary now , " he say . " there be nothing more to be learn . " have a stretcher and four man at hand . at his call they enter the room , and the stranger be lift and carry out . as they raise him , a ring tinkle down and roll across the floor . grab it up and stare at it with mystify eye . " there have be a woman here , " he cry . " it be a woman 's wedding-ring . " he hold it out , as he speak , upon the palm of his hand . we all gather round him and gaze at it . there could be no doubt that that circlet of plain gold have once adorn the finger of a bride . " this complicate matter , " say . " heaven know , they be complicate enough before . " " you be sure it do n't simplify them ? " observe . " there be nothing to be learn by stare at it . what do you find in his pocket ? " " we have it all here , " say , point to a litter of object upon one of the bottom step of the stair . " a gold watch , no. @card@ , by , of . chain , very heavy and solid . gold ring , with masonic device . gold 's head , with ruby as eye . russian leather , with card of of , corresponding with the upon the linen . no purse , but loose money to the extent of seven pound thirteen . pocket edition of 's ' , ' with name of upon the . two address to and one to . " " at what address ? " " , be leave till call for . they be both from the , and refer to the sailing of their boat from . it be clear that this unfortunate man be about to return to . " " have you make any inquiry as to this man , ? " " i do it at once , sir , " say . " i have have advertisement send to all the newspaper , and one of my man have go to the , but he have not return yet . " " have you send to ? " " we telegraph this morning . " " how do you word your inquiry ? " " we simply detail the circumstance , and say that we should be glad of any information which could help us . " " you do not ask for particular on any point which appear to you to be crucial ? " " i ask about . " " nothing else ? be there no circumstance on which this whole case appear to hinge ? will you not telegraph again ? " " i have say all i have to say , " say , in an offend voice . chuckle to himself , and appear to be about to make some remark , when , who have be in the front room while we be hold this conversation in the hall , reappear upon the scene , rub his hand in a pompous and self-satisfied manner . " , " he say , " i have just make a discovery of the high importance , and one which would have be overlook have i not make a careful examination of the wall . " the little man 's eye sparkle as he speak , and he be evidently in a state of suppress exultation at have score a point against his colleague . " come here , " he say , bustle back into the room , the atmosphere of which feel clear since the removal of its ghastly inmate . " now , stand there ! " he strike a match on his boot and hold it up against the wall . " look at that ! " he say , triumphantly . i have remark that the paper have fall away in part . in this particular corner of the room a large piece have peel off , leave a yellow square of coarse plastering . across this bare space there be scrawl in blood-red letter a single -- . " what do you think of that ? " cry the detective , with the air of a showman exhibit his show . " this be overlook because it be in the dark corner of the room , and no one thought of look there . the murderer have write it with his or her own blood . see this smear where it have trickle down the wall ! that dispose of the idea of suicide anyhow . why be that corner choose to write it on ? i will tell you . see that candle on the mantelpiece . it be light at the time , and if it be light this corner would be the bright instead of the dark portion of the wall . " " and what do it mean now that you have find it ? " ask in a depreciatory voice . " mean ? why , it mean that the writer be go to put the female name , but be disturb before he or she have time to finish . you mark my word , when this case come to be clear up you will find that a woman name have something to do with it . it be all very well for you to laugh , . you may be very smart and clever , but the old hound be the good , when all be say and do . " " i really beg your pardon ! " say my companion , who have ruffle the little man 's temper by burst into an explosion of laughter . " you certainly have the credit of be the first of us to find this out , and , as you say , it bear every mark of have be write by the other participant in last night 's mystery . i have not have time to examine this room yet , but with your permission i shall do so now . " as he speak , he whip a tape measure and a large round magnify glass from his pocket . with these two implement he trot noiselessly about the room , sometimes stop , occasionally kneel , and once lie flat upon his face . so engross be he with his occupation that he appear to have forget our presence , for he chatter away to himself under his breath the whole time , keep up a run fire of exclamation , groan , whistle , and little cry suggestive of encouragement and of hope . as i watch him i be irresistibly remind of a well-trained foxhound as it dash backwards and forwards through the covert , whine in its eagerness , until it come across the lose scent . for twenty minute or more he continue his research , measure with the most exact care the distance between mark which be entirely invisible to me , and occasionally apply his tape to the wall in an equally incomprehensible manner . in one place he gather up very carefully a little pile of grey dust from the floor , and pack it away in an envelope . finally , he examine with his glass the word upon the wall , go over every letter of it with the most minute exactness . this do , he appear to be satisfy , for he replace his tape and his glass in his pocket . " they say that genius be an infinite capacity for take pain , " he remark with a smile . " it be a very bad definition , but it do apply to detective work . " and have watch the manoeuvre 9 of their amateur companion with considerable curiosity and some contempt . they evidently fail to appreciate the fact , which i have begin to realize , that ' small action be all direct towards some definite and practical end . " what do you think of it , sir ? " they both ask . " it would be rob you of the credit of the case if i be to presume to help you , " remark my friend . " you be do so well now that it would be a pity for anyone to interfere . " there be a world of sarcasm in his voice as he speak . " if you will let me know how your investigation go , " he continue , " i shall be happy to give you any help i can . in the meantime i should like to speak to the constable who find the body . can you give me his name and address ? " glance at his . " , " he say . " he be off duty now . you will find him at @card@ , , . " take a note of the address . " come along , , " he say ; " we shall go and look him up . i will tell you one thing which may help you in the case , " he continue , turn to the two detective . " there have be murder do , and the murderer be a man . he be more than six foot high , be in the prime of life , have small foot for his height , wear coarse , square-toed boot and smoke a cigar . he come here with his victim in a four-wheeled cab , which be draw by a horse with three old shoe and one new one on his off fore leg . in all probability the murderer have a florid face , and the finger-nail of his right hand be remarkably long . these be only a few indication , but they may assist you . " and glance at each other with an incredulous smile . " if this man be murder , how be it do ? " ask the former . " poison , " say curtly , and stride off . " one other thing , , " he add , turn round at the door : " ' , ' be the german for ' revenge ; ' so do n't lose your time look for . " with which parthian shot he walk away , leave the two rival open-mouthed behind him . it be one o'clock when we leave no. 3 , . lead me to the near telegraph office , whence he dispatch a long telegram . he then hail a cab , and order the driver to take us to the address give us by . " there be nothing like first hand evidence , " he remark ; " as a matter of fact , my mind be entirely make up upon the case , but still we may as well learn all that be to be learn . " " you amaze me , , " say " surely you be not as sure as you pretend to be of all those particular which you give . " " there be no room for a mistake , " he answer . " the very first thing which i observe on arrive there be that a cab have make two rut with its wheel close to the curb . now , up to last night , we have have no rain for a week , so that those wheel which leave such a deep impression must have be there during the night . there be the mark of the horse 's hoof , too , the outline of one of which be far more clearly cut than that of the other three , show that that be a new shoe . since the cab be there after the rain begin , and be not there at any time during the have 's word for follow that it must have be there during the night , and , therefore , that it bring those two individual to the house . " " that seem simple enough , " say i ; " but how about the other man 's height ? " " why , the height of a man , in nine case out of ten , can be tell from the length of his stride . it be a simple calculation enough , though there be no use my bore you with figure . i have this fellow 's stride both on the clay outside and on the dust within . then i have a way of check my calculation . when a man write on a wall , his instinct lead him to write about the level of his own eye . now that writing be just over six foot from the ground . it be child 's play . " " and his age ? " i ask . " well , if a man can stride four and foot without the small effort , he ca n't be quite in the sere and yellow . that be the breadth of a puddle on the garden walk which he have evidently walk across . patent-leather boot have go round , and have hop over . there be no mystery about it at all . i be simply apply to ordinary life a few of those precept of observation and deduction which i advocate in that article . be there anything else that puzzle you ? " " the finger nail and the , " i suggest . " the writing on the wall be do with a man 's forefinger dip in blood . my glass allow me to observe that the plaster be slightly scratch in do it , which would not have be the case if the man 's nail have be trim . i gather up some scattered ash from the floor . it be dark in colour and an ash as be only make by a . i have make a special study of cigar fact , i have write a monograph upon the subject . i flatter myself that i can distinguish at a glance the ash of any know brand , either of cigar or of tobacco . it be just in such detail that the skilled detective differ from the and type . " " and the florid face ? " i ask . " ah , that be a more daring shot , though i have no doubt that i be right . you must not ask me that at the present state of the affair . " i pass my hand over my brow . " my head be in a whirl , " i remark ; " the more one think of it the more mysterious it grow . how come these two there be two an empty house ? what have become of the cabman who drive them ? how could one man compel another to take poison ? where do the blood come from ? what be the object of the murderer , since robbery have no part in it ? how come the woman 's ring there ? above all , why should the second man write up the german word before decamp ? i confess that i can see any possible way of reconcile all these fact . " my companion smile approvingly . " you sum up the difficulty of the situation succinctly and well , " he say . " there be much that be still obscure , though i have quite make up my mind on the main fact . as to poor 's discovery it be simply a blind intend to put the police upon a wrong track , by suggest socialism and secret society . it be not do by a german . the , if you notice , be print somewhat after the german fashion . now , a real german invariably print in the latin character , so that we may safely say that this be not write by one , but by a clumsy imitator who overdo his part . it be simply a ruse to divert inquiry into a wrong channel . i be not go to tell you much more of the case , . you know a conjuror get no credit when once he have explain his trick , and if i show you too much of my method of work , you will come to the conclusion that i be a very ordinary individual after all . " " i shall never do that , " i answer ; " you have bring detection as near an exact science as it ever will be bring in this world . " my companion flush up with pleasure at my word , and the earnest way in which i utter them . i have already observe that he be as sensitive to flattery on the score of his art as any girl could be of her beauty . " i will tell you one other thing , " he say . " patent leather @card@ and come in the same cab , and they walk down the pathway together as friendly as , in all probability . when they get inside they walk up and down the rather , stand still while walk up and down . i could read all that in the dust ; and i could read that as he walk he grow more and more excited . that be show by the increase length of his stride . he be talk all the while , and work himself up , no doubt , into a fury . then the tragedy occur . i have tell you all i know myself now , for the rest be mere surmise and conjecture . we have a good working basis , however , on which to start . we must hurry up , for i want to go to 's concert to hear this afternoon . " this conversation have occur while our cab have be thread its way through a long succession of dingy street and dreary by-way . in the dingy and dreary of them our driver suddenly come to a stand . " that be in there , " he say , point to a narrow slit in the line of brick . " you will find me here when you come back . " be not an attractive locality . the narrow passage lead us into a quadrangle pave with flag and line by sordid dwelling . we pick our way among group of dirty child , and through line of discolour linen , until we come to @card@ , the door of which be decorate with a small slip of brass on which the name be engrave . on enquiry we find that the constable be in bed , and we be show into a little front parlour to await his come . he appear presently , look a little irritable at be disturb in his slumber . " i make my report at the office , " he say . take a from his pocket and play with it pensively . " we think that we should like to hear it all from your own lip , " he say . " i shall be most happy to tell you anything i can , " the constable answer with his eye upon the little golden disk . " just let us hear it all in your own way as it occur . " sit down on the horsehair sofa , and knit his brow as though determine not to omit anything in his narrative . " i will tell it from the beginning , " he say . " my time be from ten at night to six in the morning . at eleven there be a fight at ' ' ; but bar that all be quiet enough on the beat . at one o'clock it begin to rain , and i meet who have the we stand together at the corner of ' . about two or a little think i would take a look round and see that all be right down the . it be precious dirty and lonely . not a soul do i meet all the way down , though a cab or two go past me . i be a ' down , ' between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hot would be , when suddenly the glint of a light catch my eye in the window of that same house . now , i know that them two house in be empty on account of him that own them who wo n't have the drain see to , though the very last tenant what live in one of them die o ' typhoid fever . i be knock all in a heap therefore at see a light in the window , and i suspect as something be wrong . when i get to the door -- -- -- " " you stop , and then walk back to the garden gate , " my companion interrupt . " what do you do that for ? " give a violent jump , and stare at with the utmost amazement upon his feature . " why , that be true , sir , " he say ; " though how you come to know it , only know . see , when i get up to the door it be so still and so lonesome , that i think i will be none the bad for some one with me . i ai n't afeared of anything on this side o ' the grave ; but i think that maybe it be him that die o ' the typhoid inspect the drain what kill him . the thought give me a kind o ' turn , and i walk back to the gate to see if i could see 's lantern , but there be n't no sign of him nor of anyone else . " " there be no one in the street ? " " not a ' soul , sir , nor as much as a dog . then i pull myself together and go back and push the door open . all be quiet inside , so i go into the room where the light be ' . there be a candle ' on the red wax by its light i see -- -- -- " " yes , i know all that you see . you walk round the room several time , and you kneel down by the body , and then you walk through and try the kitchen door , and then -- -- -- " spring to his foot with a frightened face and suspicion in his eye . " where be you hide to see all that ? " he cry . " it seem to me that you know a deal more than you should . " laugh and throw his card across the table to the constable . " do n't get arrest me for the murder , " he say . " i be one of the hound and not the wolf ; or will answer for that . go on , though . what do you do next ? " resume his seat , without however lose his mystify expression . " i go back to the gate and sound my whistle . that bring and two more to the spot . " " be the street empty then ? " " well , it be , as far as anybody that could be of any good go . " " what do you mean ? " the constable 's feature broaden into a grin . " i have see many a drunk chap in my time , " he say , " but never anyone so ' drunk as that cove . he be at the gate when i come out , ' up agin the railing , and ' at the pitch o ' his lung about 's , or some such stuff . he could n't stand , far less help . " " what sort of a man be he ? " ask . appear to be somewhat irritate at this digression . " he be an uncommon drunk sort o ' man , " he say . " he have ' find in the station if we have n't be so take up . " " his n't you notice them ? " break in impatiently . " i should think i do notice them , see that i have to prop him and between us . he be a long chap , with a red face , the low part muffle round -- -- -- " " that will do , " cry . " what become of him ? " " we will enough to do without lookin ' after him , " the policeman say , in an aggrieve voice . " i will wager he find his way home all right . " " how be he dress ? " " a brown overcoat . " " have he a whip in his hand ? " " a . " " he must have leave it behind , " mutter my companion . " you do n't happen to see or hear a cab after that ? " " no. " " there be a for you , " my companion say , stand up and take his hat . " i be afraid , , that you will never rise in the force . that head of yours should be for use as well as ornament . you might have gain your sergeant 's stripe last night . the man whom you hold in your hand be the man who hold the clue of this mystery , and whom we be seek . there be no use of argue about it now ; i tell you that it be so . come along , . " we start off for the cab together , leave our informant incredulous , but obviously uncomfortable . " the blunder fool , " say , bitterly , as we drive back to our lodging . " just to think of his have such an incomparable bit of good luck , and not take advantage of it . " " i be rather in the dark still . it be true that the description of this man tally with your idea of the second party in this mystery . but why should he come back to the house after leave it ? that be not the way of criminal . " " the ring , man , the ring : that be what he come back for . if we have no other way of catch him , we can always bait our line with the ring . i shall have him , will lay you two to one that i have him . i must thank you for it all . i might not have go but for you , and so have miss the fine study i ever come across : a study in scarlet , ? why should n't we use a little art jargon . there be the scarlet thread of murder run through the colourless skein of life , and our duty be to unravel it , and isolate it , and expose every inch of it . and now for lunch , and then for . her attack and her bowing be splendid . what be that little thing of 's she play so magnificently : . " lean back in the cab , this amateur bloodhound carol away like a lark while i meditate upon the many-sidedness of the human mind . our morning 's exertion have be too much for my weak health , and i be tire out in the afternoon . after ' departure for the concert , i lie down upon the sofa and endeavour to get a couple of hour ' sleep . it be a useless attempt . my mind have be too much excite by all that have occur , and the strange fancy and surmise crowd into it . every time that i close my eye i see before me the distorted countenance of the murder man . so sinister be the impression which that face have produce upon me that i find it difficult to feel anything but gratitude for him who have remove its owner from the world . if ever human feature bespeak vice of the most malignant type , they be certainly those of , of . still i recognize that justice must be do , and that the depravity of the victim be no @card@ in the eye of the law . the more i think of it the more extraordinary do my companion 's hypothesis , that the man have be poison , appear . i remember how he have sniff his lip , and have no doubt that he have detect something which have give rise to the idea . then , again , if not poison , what have cause the man 's death , since there be neither wound nor mark of strangulation ? but , on the other hand , whose blood be that which lie so thickly upon the floor ? there be no sign of a struggle , nor have the victim any weapon with which he might have wound an antagonist . as long as all these question be unsolved , i feel that sleep would be no easy matter , either for or myself . his quiet self-confident manner convince me that he have already form a theory which explain all the fact , though what it be i could not for an instant conjecture . he be very late in late , that i know that the concert could not have detain him all the time . dinner be on the table before he appear . " it be magnificent , " he say , as he take his seat . " do you remember what say about music ? he claim that the power of produce and appreciate it exist among the human race long before the power of speech be arrive at . perhaps that be why we be so subtly influence by it . there be vague memory in our soul of those misty century when the world be in its childhood . " " that be rather a broad idea , " i remark . " one 's idea must be as broad as if they be to interpret nature , " he answer . " what be the matter ? you be not look quite yourself . this affair have upset you . " " to tell the truth , it have , " i say . " i ought to be more case-harden after my afghan experience . i see my own comrade hack to piece at without lose my nerve . " " i can understand . there be a mystery about this which stimulate the imagination ; where there be no imagination there be no horror . have you see the evening paper ? " " no. " " it give a fairly good account of the affair . it do not mention the fact that when the man be raise up , a woman 's wedding ring fall upon the floor . it be just as well it do not . " " why ? " " look at this advertisement , " he answer . " i have one send to every paper this morning immediately after the affair . " he throw the paper across to me and i glance at the place indicate . it be the first announcement in the " found " column . " in , this morning , " it run , " a plain gold wedding ring , find in the roadway between ' ' and . apply , , , between eight and nine this evening . " " excuse my use your name , " he say . " if i use my own some of these dunderhead would recognize it , and want to meddle in the affair . " " that be all right , " i answer . " but suppose anyone apply , i have no ring . " " oh yes , you have , " say he , hand me one . " this will do very well . it be almost a facsimile . " " and who do you expect will answer this advertisement . " " why , the man in the brown florid friend with the square toe . if he do not come himself he will send an accomplice . " " would he not consider it as too dangerous ? " " not at all . if my view of the case be correct , and i have every reason to believe that it be , this man would rather risk anything than lose the ring . accord to my notion he drop it while stoop over 's body , and do not miss it at the time . after leave the house he discover his loss and hurried back , but find the police already in possession , owe to his own folly in leave the candle burning . he have to pretend to be drink in order to allay the suspicion which might have be arouse by his appearance at the gate . now put yourself in that man 's place . on think the matter over , it must have occur to him that it be possible that he have lose the ring in the road after leave the house . what would he do , then ? he would eagerly look out for the evening paper in the hope of see it among the article find . his eye , of course , would light upon this . he would be overjoy . why should he fear a trap ? there would be no reason in his eye why the finding of the ring should be connect with the murder . he would come . he will come . you shall see him within an hour ? " " and then ? " i ask . " oh , you can leave me to deal with him then . have you any arm ? " " i have my old service revolver and a few cartridge . " " you have well clean it and load it . he will be a desperate man , and though i shall take him unawares , it be as well to be ready for anything . " i go to my bedroom and follow his advice . when i return with the pistol the table have be clear , and be engage in his favourite occupation of scrape upon his violin . " the plot thicken , " he say , as i enter ; " i have just have an answer to my american telegram . my view of the case be the correct one . " " and that be ? " i ask eagerly . " my fiddle would be the good for new string , " he remark . " put your pistol in your pocket . when the fellow come speak to him in an ordinary way . leave the rest to me . do n't frighten him by look at him too hard . " " it be eight o'clock now , " i say , glance at my watch . " yes . he will probably be here in a few minute . open the door slightly . that will do . now put the key on the inside . thank you ! this be a queer old book i pick up at a stall inter in at in the , in @card@ . ' head be still firm on his shoulder when this little volume be strike off . " " who be the printer ? " " , whoever he may have be . on the , in very fade ink , be write ' . ' i wonder who be . some seventeenth century lawyer , i suppose . his writing have a legal twist about it . here come our man , i think . " as he speak there be a sharp ring at the bell . rise softly and move his chair in the direction of the door . we hear the servant pass along the hall , and the sharp click of the latch as she open it . " do live here ? " ask a clear but rather harsh voice . we could not hear the servant 's reply , but the door close , and some one begin to ascend the stair . the footfall be an uncertain and shuffle one . a look of surprise pass over the face of my companion as he listen to it . it come slowly along the passage , and there be a feeble tap at the door . " come in , " i cry . at my summons , instead of the man of violence whom we expect , a very old and wrinkle woman hobble into the apartment . she appear to be dazzle by the sudden blaze of light , and after drop a curtsey , she stand blink at us with her blear eye and fumble in her pocket with nervous , shaky finger . i glance at my companion , and his face have assume such a disconsolate expression that it be all i could do to keep my countenance . the old crone draw out an evening paper , and point at our advertisement . " it be this as have bring me , good gentleman , " she say , drop another curtsey ; " a gold wedding ring in the . it belong to my girl , as be marry only this time twelvemonth , which her husband be steward aboard a boat , and what he will say if he come ' and find her without her ring be more than i can think , he be short enough at the good o ' time , but more especially when he have the drink . if it please you , she go to the circus last night along with -- -- -- " " be that her ring ? " i ask . " the be thank ! " cry the old woman ; " will be a glad woman this night . that be the ring . " " and what may your address be ? " i inquire , take up a pencil . " @card@ , , . a weary way from here . " " the do not lie between any circus and , " say sharply . the old woman face round and look keenly at him from her little red-rimmed eye . " the gentleman ask me for address , " she say . " live in lodging at 3 , , . " " and your name be -- -- -- ? " " my name be 's be , which married a smart , clean lad , too , as long as he be at sea , and no steward in the company more think of ; but when on shore , what with the woman and what with liquor shop -- -- -- " " here be your ring , , " i interrupt , in obedience to a sign from my companion ; " it clearly belong to your daughter , and i be glad to be able to restore it to the rightful owner . " with many mumble blessing and protestation of gratitude the old crone pack it away in her pocket , and shuffle off down the stair . spring to his foot the moment that she be go and rush into his room . he return in a few second envelop in an ulster and a cravat . " i will follow her , " he say , hurriedly ; " she must be an accomplice , and will lead me to him . wait up for me . " the hall door have hardly slam behind our visitor before have descend the stair . look through the window i could see her walking feebly along the other side , while her pursuer dog her some little distance behind . " either his whole theory be incorrect , " i think to myself , " or else he will be lead now to the heart of the mystery . " there be no need for him to ask me to wait up for him , for i feel that sleep be impossible until i hear the result of his adventure . it be close upon nine when he set out . i have no idea how long he might be , but i sit stolidly puff at my pipe and skip over the page of 's " . " ten o'clock pass , and i hear the footstep of the maid as they patter off to bed . eleven , and the more stately tread of the landlady pass my door , bind for the same destination . it be close upon twelve before i hear the sharp sound of his . the instant he enter i see by his face that he have not be successful . amusement and chagrin seem to be struggle for the mastery , until the former suddenly carry the day , and he burst into a hearty laugh . " i would n't have the know it for the world , " he cry , drop into his chair ; " i have chaff them so much that they would never have let me hear the end of it . i can afford to laugh , because i know that i will be even with them in the long run . " " what be it then ? " i ask . " oh , i do n't mind tell a story against myself . that creature have go a little way when she begin to limp and show every sign of be . presently she come to a halt , and hail a four-wheeler which be pass . i manage to be close to her so as to hear the address , but i need not have be so anxious , for she sing it out loud enough to be hear at the other side of the street , ' to @card@ , , , ' she cry . this begin to look genuine , i think , and have see her safely inside , i perch myself behind . that be an art which every detective should be an expert at . well , away we rattle , and never draw rein until we reach the street in question . i hop off before we come to the door , and stroll down the street in an easy , lounge way . i see the cab pull up . the driver jump down , and i see him open the door and stand expectantly . nothing come out though . when i reach him he be grope about frantically in the empty cab , and give vent to the fine assorted collection of oath that ever i listen to . there be no sign or trace of his passenger , and i fear it will be some time before he get his fare . on inquire at @card@ we find that the house belong to a respectable paperhanger , name , and that no one of the name either of or have ever be hear of there . " " you do n't mean to say , " i cry , in amazement , " that that totter , feeble old woman be able to get out of the cab while it be in motion , without either you or the driver see her ? " " old woman be damn ! " say , sharply . " we be the old woman to be so take in . it must have be a young man , and an active one , too , besides be an incomparable actor . the get-up be inimitable . he see that he be follow , no doubt , and use this means of give me the slip . it show that the man we be after be not as lonely as i imagine he be , but have friend who be ready to risk something for him . now , , you be look . take my advice and turn in . " i be certainly feel very weary , so i obey his injunction . i leave seat in front of the smoulder fire , and long into the watch of the night i hear the low , melancholy of his violin , and know that he be still ponder over the strange problem which he have set himself to unravel . the paper next day be full of the " , " as they term it . each have a long account of the affair , and some have leader upon it in addition . there be some information in them which be new to me . i still retain in my scrap-book numerous clipping and extract bearing upon the case . here be a condensation of a few of them : -- - the remark that in the history of crime there have seldom be a tragedy which present stranger feature . the german name of the victim , the absence of all other motive , and the sinister inscription on the wall , all point to its perpetration by political refugee and revolutionist . the have many branch in , and the deceased have , no doubt , infringe their unwritten law , and be track down by them . after allude airily to the , aqua , , the , the darwinian theory , the principle of , and the murder , the article conclude by admonish the government and advocate a close watch over foreigner in . the comment upon the fact that lawless outrage of the sort usually occur under a . they arise from the unsettling of the mind of the mass , and the consequent weakening of all authority . the deceased be an american gentleman who have be reside for some week in the . he have stay at the boarding-house of madame , in , . he be accompany in his travel by his private secretary , . the two bid adieu to their landlady upon , the 4th . , and depart to with the avowed intention of catch the express . they be afterwards see together upon the platform . nothing more be know of them until 's body be , as record , discover in an empty house in the , many mile from . how he come there , or how he meet his fate , be question which be still involve in mystery . nothing be know of the whereabouts of . we be glad to learn that and , of , be both engage upon the case , and it be confidently anticipate that these well-known officer will speedily throw light upon the matter . the observe that there be no doubt as to the crime be a political one . the despotism and hatred of liberalism which animate the have have the effect of drive to our shore a number of man who might have make excellent citizen be they not sour by the recollection of all that they have undergo . among these man there be a stringent code of honour , any infringement of which be punish by death . every effort should be make to find the secretary , , and to ascertain some particular of the habit of the deceased . a great step have be gain by the discovery of the address of the house at which he have result which be entirely due to the acuteness and energy of of . and i read these notice over together at breakfast , and they appear to afford him considerable amusement . " i tell you that , whatever happen , and would be sure to score . " " that depend on how it turn out . " " oh , bless you , it do n't matter in the least . if the man be catch , it will be on account of their exertion ; if he escape , it will be in spite of their exertion . it be heads i win and tail you lose . whatever they do , they will have follower . ' sot plus sot qui . ' " " what on earth be this ? " i cry , for at this moment there come the patter of many step in the hall and on the stair , accompany by audible expression of disgust upon the part of our landlady . " it be the division of the detective police force , " say my companion , gravely ; and as he speak there rush into the room half a dozen of the dirty and most ragged street arab that ever i clap eye on . " ' ! " cry , in a sharp tone , and the six dirty little scoundrel stand in a line like so many disreputable statuette . " in future you shall send up alone to report , and the rest of you must wait in the street . have you find it , ? " " no , sir , we hai n't , " say one of the youth . " i hardly expect you would . you must keep on until you do . here be your wage . " @card@ he hand each of them a shilling . " now , off you go , and come back with a good report next time . " he wave his hand , and they scamper away downstairs like so many rat , and we hear their shrill voice next moment in the street . " there be more work to be get out of one of those little beggar than out of a dozen of the force , " remark . " the mere sight of an official-looking person seal man 's lip . these youngster , however , go everywhere and hear everything . they be as sharp as needle , too ; all they want be organisation . " " be it on this case that you be employ them ? " i ask . " yes ; there be a point which i wish to ascertain . it be merely a matter of time . ! we be go to hear some news now with a vengeance ! here be come down the road with beatitude write upon every feature of his face . bind for us , i know . yes , he be stop . there he be ! " there be a violent peal at the bell , and in a few second the fair-haired detective come up the stair , three step at a time , and burst into our sitting-room . " my dear fellow , " he cry , wring ' unresponsive hand , " congratulate me ! i have make the whole thing as clear as day . " a shade of anxiety seem to me to cross my companion 's expressive face . " do you mean that you be on the right track ? " he ask . " the right track ! why , sir , we have the man under lock and key . " " and his name be ? " " , sub-lieutenant in her 's navy , " cry , pompously , rub his fat hand and inflate his chest . give a sigh of relief , and relax into a smile . " take a seat , and try one of these cigar , " he say . " we be anxious to know how you manage it . will you have some whiskey and water ? " " i do n't mind if i do , " the detective answer . " the tremendous exertion which i have go through during the last day or two have wear me out . not so much bodily exertion , you understand , as the strain upon the mind . you will appreciate that , , for we be both . " " you do me too much honour , " say , gravely . " let us hear how you arrive at this most gratifying result . " the detective seat himself in the , and puff complacently at his cigar . then suddenly he slap his thigh in a paroxysm of amusement . " the fun of it be , " he cry , " that that fool , who think himself so smart , have go off upon the wrong track altogether . he be after the secretary , who have no more to do with the crime than the babe unborn . i have no doubt that he have catch him by this time . " the idea tickle so much that he laugh until he choke . " and how do you get your clue ? " " ah , i will tell you all about it . of course , , this be strictly between ourselves . the first difficulty which we have to contend with be the finding of this 's antecedent . some people would have wait until their advertisement be answer , or until party come forward and volunteer information . that be not 's way of go to work . you remember the hat beside the dead man ? " " yes , " say ; " by and , @card@ , . " look quite crest-fallen . " i have no idea that you notice that , " he say . " have you be there ? " " no. " " ! " cry , in a relieved voice ; " you should never neglect a chance , however small it may seem . " " to a great mind , nothing be little , " remark , sententiously . " well , i go to , and ask him if he have sell a hat of that size and description . he look over his book , and come on it at once . he have send the hat to a , reside at 's , . thus i get at his address . " " smart ! " murmur . " i next call upon madame , " continue the detective . " i find her very pale and distressed . her daughter be in the room , uncommonly fine girl she be , too ; she be look red about the eye and her lip tremble as i speak to her . that do n't escape my notice . i begin to smell a rat . you know the feeling , , when you come upon the right kind of thrill in your nerve . ' have you hear of the mysterious death of your late boarder , of ? ' i ask . " the mother nod . she do n't seem able to get out a word . the daughter burst into tear . i feel more than ever that these people know something of the matter . " ' at what o'clock do leave your house for the train ? ' i ask . " ' at eight o'clock , ' she say , gulp in her throat to keep down her agitation . ' his secretary , , say that there be two at @card@ and one at @card@ . he be to catch the first . @card@ " ' and be that the last which you see of him ? ' " a terrible change come over the woman 's face as i ask the question . her feature turn perfectly livid . it be some second before she could get out the single word ' when it do come it be in a husky unnatural tone . " there be silence for a moment , and then the daughter speak in a calm clear voice . " ' no good can ever come of falsehood , mother , ' she say . ' let us be frank with this gentleman . we do see again . ' " ' forgive you ! ' cry madame , throw up her hand and sink back in her chair . ' you have murder your brother . ' " ' would rather that we speak the truth , ' the girl answer firmly . " ' you have well tell me all about it now , ' i say . ' be bad than none . besides , you do not know how much we know of it . ' " ' on your head be it , ! ' cry her mother ; and then , turn to me , ' i will tell you all , sir . do not imagine that my agitation on behalf of my son arise from any fear lest he should have have a hand in this terrible affair . he be utterly innocent of it . my dread be , however , that in your eye and in the eye of other he may appear to be compromise . that however be surely impossible . his high character , his profession , his antecedent would all forbid it . ' " ' your good way be to make a clean breast of the fact , ' i answer . ' upon it , if your son be innocent he will be none the bad . ' " ' perhaps , , you have well leave us together , ' she say , and her daughter withdraw . ' now , sir , ' she continue , ' i have no intention of tell you all this , but since my poor daughter have disclose it i have no alternative . have once decide to speak , i will tell you all without omit any particular . ' " ' it be your wise course , ' say " ' have be with us nearly three week . he and his secretary , , have be travel on the continent . i notice a " " label upon each of their trunk , show that that have be their last stopping place . be a quiet reserved man , but his employer , i be sorry to say , be far otherwise . he be coarse in his habit and brutish in his way . the very night of his arrival he become very much the bad for drink , and , indeed , after twelve o'clock in the day he could hardly ever be say to be sober . his manner towards the be disgustingly free and familiar . bad of all , he speedily assume the same attitude towards my daughter , , and speak to her more than once in a way which , fortunately , she be too innocent to understand . on one occasion he actually seize her in his arm and embrace outrage which cause his own secretary to reproach him for his unmanly conduct . ' " ' but why do you stand all this , ' i ask . ' i suppose that you can get rid of your boarder when you wish . ' " blush at my pertinent question . ' would to that i have give him notice on the very day that he come , ' she say . ' but it be a sore temptation . they be pay a pound a day pound a week , and this be the slack season . i be a widow , and my boy in the have cost me much . i grudge to lose the money . i act for the good . this last be too much , however , and i give him notice to leave on account of it . that be the reason of his go . ' " ' well ? ' " ' my heart grow light when i see him drive away . my son be on leave just now , but i do not tell him anything of all this , for his temper be violent , and he be passionately fond of his sister . when i close the door behind them a load seem to be lift from my mind . alas , in less than an hour there be a ring at the bell , and i learn that have return . he be much excite , and evidently the bad for drink . he force his way into the room , where i be sit with my daughter , and make some incoherent remark about have miss his train . he then turn to , and before my very face , propose to her that she should fly with him . " you be of age , " he say , " and there be no law to stop you . i have money enough and to spare . never mind the old girl here , but come along with me now straight away . you shall live like a princess . " be so frighten that she shrink away from him , but he catch her by the wrist and endeavour to draw her towards the door . i scream , and at that moment my son come into the room . what happen then i do not know . i hear oath and the confused sound of a scuffle . i be too terrify to raise my head . when i do look up i see standing in the doorway laugh , with a stick in his hand . " i do n't think that fine fellow will trouble us again , " he say . " i will just go after him and see what he do with himself . " with those word he take his hat and start off down the street . the next morning we hear of 's mysterious death . ' " this statement come from 's lip with many gasp and pause . at time she speak so low that i could hardly catch the word . i make shorthand note of all that she say , however , so that there should be no possibility of a mistake . " " it be quite exciting , " say , with a yawn . " what happen next ? " " when pause , " the detective continue , " i see that the whole case hang upon one point . fix her with my eye in a way which i always find effective with woman , i ask her at what hour her son return . " ' i do not know , ' she answer . " ' not know ? ' " ' no ; he have a , and he let himself in . ' " ' after you go to bed ? ' " ' yes . ' " ' when do you go to bed ? ' " ' about eleven . ' " ' so your son be go at least two hour ? ' " ' yes . ' " ' possibly four or five ? ' " ' yes . ' " ' what be he do during that time ? ' " ' i do not know , ' she answer , turn white to her very lip . " of course after that there be nothing more to be do . i find out where be , take two officer with me , and arrest him . when i touch him on the shoulder and warn him to come quietly with us , he answer us as bold as brass , ' i suppose you be arrest me for be concern in the death of that scoundrel , ' he say . we have say nothing to him about it , so that his allude to it have a most suspicious aspect . " " very , " say . " he still carry the heavy stick which the mother describe him as have with him when he follow . it be a stout oak cudgel . " " what be your theory , then ? " " well , my theory be that he follow as far as the . when there , a fresh altercation arise between them , in the course of which receive a blow from the stick , in the pit of the stomach , perhaps , which kill him without leave any mark . the night be so wet that no one be about , so drag the body of his victim into the empty house . as to the candle , and the blood , and the writing on the wall , and the ring , they may all be so many trick to throw the police on to the wrong scent . " " well do ! " say in an encouraging voice . " really , , you be get along . we shall make something of you yet . " " i flatter myself that i have manage it rather neatly , " the detective answer proudly . " the young man volunteer a statement , in which he say that after follow some time , the latter perceive him , and take a cab in order to get away from him . on his way home he meet an old shipmate , and take a long walk with him . on be ask where this old shipmate live , he be unable to give any satisfactory reply . i think the whole case fit together uncommonly well . what amuse me be to think of , who have start off upon the wrong scent . i be afraid he wo n't make much of @card@ why , by , here be the very man himself ! " it be indeed , who have ascend the stair while we be talk , and who now enter the room . the assurance and jauntiness which generally mark his demeanour and dress be , however , want . his face be disturb and trouble , while his clothes be disarrange and untidy . he have evidently come with the intention of consulting with , for on perceive his colleague he appear to be embarrass and put out . he stand in the centre of the room , fumble nervously with his hat and uncertain what to do . " this be a most extraordinary case , " he say at most incomprehensible affair . " " ah , you find it so , ! " cry , triumphantly . " i think you would come to that conclusion . have you manage to find the , ? " " the , , " say gravely , " be murder at 's private hotel about six o'clock this morning . " the intelligence with which greet us be so momentous and so unexpected , that we be all three fairly . spring out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey and water . i stare in silence at , whose lip be compress and his brow draw down over his eye . " too ! " he mutter . " the plot thicken . " " it be quite thick enough before , " grumble , take a chair . " i seem to have drop into a sort of council of war . " " be you sure of this piece of intelligence ? " stammer . " i have just come from his room , " say . " i be the first to discover what have occur . " " we have be hear 's view of the matter , " observe . " would you mind let us know what you have see and do ? " " i have no objection , " answer , seat himself . " i freely confess that i be of the opinion that be concern in the death of . this fresh development have show me that i be completely mistake . full of the one idea , i set myself to find out what have become of the . they have be see together at about eight on the evening of the third . at two in the morning have be find in the . the question which confront me be to find out how have be employ between @card@ and the time of the crime , and what have become of him afterwards . i telegraph to , give a description of the man , and warn them to keep a watch upon the american boat . i then set to work call upon all the hotel and lodging-house in the vicinity of . you see , i argue that if and his companion have become separate , the natural course for the latter would be to put up somewhere in the vicinity for the night , and then to hang about the station again next morning . " " they would be likely to agree on some meeting-place beforehand , " remark . " so it prove . i spend the whole of yesterday evening in make enquiry entirely without avail . this morning i begin very early , and at eight o'clock i reach 's , in . on my enquiry as to whether a be live there , they at once answer me in the affirmative . " ' no doubt you be the gentleman whom he be expect , ' they say . ' he have be wait for a gentleman for two day . ' " ' where be he now ? ' i ask . " ' he be upstairs in bed . he wish to be call at nine . ' " ' i will go up and see him at once , ' i say . " it seem to me that my sudden appearance might shake his nerve and lead him to say something unguarded . the volunteer to show me the room : it be on the second floor , and there be a small corridor lead up to it . the point out the door to me , and be about to go downstairs again when i see something that make me feel sickish , in spite of my twenty year ' experience . from under the door there curl a little red ribbon of blood , which have meander across the passage and form a little pool along the skirting at the other side . i give a cry , which bring the back . he nearly faint when he see it . the door be lock on the inside , but we put our shoulder to it , and knock it in . the window of the room be open , and beside the window , all huddle up , lay the body of a man in his nightdress . he be quite dead , and have be for some time , for his limb be rigid and cold . when we turn him over , the recognize him at once as be the same gentleman who have engage the room under the name of . the cause of death be a deep stab in the left side , which must have penetrate the heart . and now come the strange part of the affair . what do you suppose be above the murder man ? " i feel a creep of the flesh , and a presentiment of come horror , even before answer . " the word , write in letter of blood , " he say . " that be it , " say , in an awe-struck voice ; and we be all silent for a while . there be something so methodical and so incomprehensible about the deed of this unknown assassin , that it impart a fresh ghastliness to his crime . my nerve , which be steady enough on the field of battle tingle as i think of it . " the man be see , " continue . " a milk boy , pass on his way to the dairy , happen to walk down the lane which lead from the mew at the back of the hotel . he notice that a ladder , which usually lie there , be raise against one of the window of the second floor , which be wide open . after pass , he look back and see a man descend the ladder . he come down so quietly and openly that the boy imagine him to be some carpenter or joiner at work in the hotel . he take no particular notice of him , beyond think in his own mind that it be early for him to be at work . he have an impression that the man be tall , have a reddish face , and be dress in a long , brownish coat . he must have stay in the room some little time after the murder , for we find blood-stained water in the basin , where he have wash his hand , and mark on the sheet where he have deliberately wipe his knife . " i glance at on hear the description of the murderer , which tally so exactly with his own . there be , however , no trace of exultation or satisfaction upon his face . " do you find nothing in the room which could furnish a clue to the murderer ? " he ask . " nothing . have 's purse in his pocket , but it seem that this be usual , as he do all the pay . there be eighty odd pound in it , but nothing have be take . whatever the motive of these extraordinary crime , robbery be certainly not one of them . there be no paper or memorandum in the murder man 's pocket , except a single telegram , date from about a month ago , and contain the word , ' be in . ' there be no name append to this message . " " and there be nothing else ? " ask . " nothing of any importance . the man 's novel , with which he have read himself to sleep be lie upon the bed , and his pipe be on a chair beside him . there be a glass of water on the table , and on the window-sill a small chip ointment box contain a couple of pill . " spring from his chair with an exclamation of delight . " the last link , " he cry , exultantly . " my case be complete . " the two detective stare at him in amazement . " i have now in my hand , " my companion say , confidently , " all the thread which have form such a tangle . there be , of course , detail to be fill in , but i be as certain of all the main fact , from the time that part from at the station , up to the discovery of the body of the latter , as if i have see them with my own eye . i will give you a proof of my knowledge . could you lay your hand upon those pill ? " " i have them , " say , produce a small white box ; " i take them and the purse and the telegram , intend to have them put in a place of safety at the . it be the merest chance my take these pill , for i be bind to say that i do not attach any importance to them . " " give them here , " say . " now , , " turn to me , " be those ordinary pill ? " they certainly be not . they be of a pearly grey colour , small , round , and almost transparent against the light . " from their lightness and transparency , i should imagine that they be soluble in water , " i remark . " precisely so , " answer . " now would you mind go down and fetch that poor little devil of a terrier which have be bad so long , and which the landlady want you to put out of its pain yesterday . " i go downstairs and carry the dog in my arm . it be laboured breathing and glazing eye show that it be not far from its end . indeed , its snow-white muzzle proclaim that it have already exceed the usual term of canine existence . i place it upon a cushion on the rug . " i will now cut one of these pill in two , " say , and draw his penknife he suit the action to the word . " one half we return into the box for future purpose . the other half i will place in this wine glass , in which be a teaspoonful of water . you perceive that our friend , the , be right , and that it readily dissolve . " " this may be very interesting , " say , in the injured tone of one who suspect that he be be laugh at , " i can see , however , what it have to do with the death of . " " patience , my friend , patience ! you will find in time that it have everything to do with it . i shall now add a little milk to make the mixture palatable , and on present it to the dog we find that he lap it up readily enough . " as he speak he turn the content of the wine glass into a saucer and place it in front of the terrier , who speedily lick it dry . ' earnest demeanour have so far convince us that we all sit in silence , watch the animal intently , and expect some startling effect . none such appear , however . the dog continue to lie stretch upon @card@ cushion , breathe in a laboured way , but apparently neither the good nor the bad for its draught . have take out his watch , and as minute follow minute without result , an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointment appear upon his feature . he gnaw his lip , drum his finger upon the table , and show every other symptom of acute impatience . so great be his emotion , that i feel sincerely sorry for him , while the two detective smile derisively , by no mean displease at this check which he have meet . " it ca n't be a coincidence , " he cry , at last springing from his chair and pace wildly up and down the room ; " it be impossible that it should be a mere coincidence . the very pill which i suspect in the case of be actually find after the death of . and yet they be inert . what can it mean ? surely my whole chain of reasoning can have be false . it be impossible ! and yet this wretched dog be none the bad . ah , i have it ! i have it ! " with a perfect shriek of delight he rush to the box , cut the other pill in two , dissolve it , added milk , and present it to the terrier . the unfortunate creature 's tongue seem hardly to have be moisten in it before it give a convulsive shiver in every limb , and lie as rigid and lifeless as if it have be strike by lightning . draw a long breath , and wipe the perspiration from his forehead . " i should have more faith , " he say ; " i ought to know by this time that when a fact appear to be oppose to a long train of deduction , it invariably prove to be capable of bear some other interpretation . of the two pill in that box one be of the most deadly poison , and the other be entirely harmless . i ought to have know that before ever i see the box at all . " this last statement appear to me to be so startling , that i could hardly believe that he be in his sober sense . there be the dead dog , however , to prove that his conjecture have be correct . it seem to me that the mist in my own mind be gradually clear away , and i begin to have a dim , vague perception of the truth . " all this seem strange to you , " continue , " because you fail at the beginning of the inquiry to grasp the importance of the single real clue which be present to you . i have the good fortune to seize upon that , and everything which have occur since then have serve to confirm my original supposition , and , indeed , be the logical sequence of it . hence thing which have perplex you and make the case more obscure , have serve to enlighten me and to strengthen my conclusion . it be a mistake to confound strangeness with mystery . the most commonplace crime be often the most mysterious because it present no new or special feature from which deduction may be draw . this murder would have be infinitely more difficult to unravel have the body of the victim be simply find lie in the roadway without any of those outr and sensational accompaniment which have render it remarkable . these strange detail , far from make the case more difficult , have really have the effect of make it less so . " , who have listen to this address with considerable impatience , could contain himself no longer . " look here , , " he say , " we be all ready to acknowledge that you be a smart man , and that you have your own method of work . we want something more than mere theory and preach now , though . it be a case of take the man . i have make my case out , and it seem i be wrong . could not have be engage in this second affair . go after his man , , and it appear that he be wrong too . you have throw out hint here , and hint there , and seem to know more than we do , but the time have come when we feel that we have a right to ask you straight how much you do know of the business . can you name the man who do it ? " " i can help feel that be right , sir , " remark . " we have both try , and we have both fail . you have remark more than once since i have be in the room that you have all the evidence which you require . surely you will not withhold it any longer . " " any delay in arrest the assassin , " i observe , " might give him time to perpetrate some fresh atrocity . " thus press by us all , show sign of irresolution . he continue to walk up and down the room with his head sink on his chest and his brow draw down , as be his habit when lose in thought . " there will be no more murder , " he say at last , stop abruptly and face us . " you can put that consideration out of the question . you have ask me if i know the name of the assassin . i do . the mere know of his name be a small thing , however , compare with the power of lay our hand upon him . this i expect very shortly to do . i have good hope of manage it through my own arrangement ; but it be a thing which need delicate handling , for we have a shrewd and desperate man to deal with , who be support , as i have have occasion to prove , by another who be as clever as himself . as long as this man have no idea that anyone can have a clue there be some chance of secure him ; but if he have the slight suspicion , he would change his name , and vanish in an instant among the four million inhabitant of this great city . without mean to hurt either of your feeling , i be bind to say that i consider these man to be more than a match for the official force , and that be why i have not ask your assistance . if i fail i shall , of course , incur all the blame due to this omission ; but that i be prepare for . at present i be ready to promise that the instant that i can communicate with you without endanger my own combination , i shall do so . " and seem to be far from satisfy by this assurance , or by the depreciate allusion to the detective police . the former have flush up to the root of his flaxen hair , while the other 's beady eye glisten with curiosity and resentment . neither of them have time to speak , however , before there be a tap at the door , and the spokesman of the street arab , young , introduce his insignificant and unsavoury person . " please , sir , " he say , touch his forelock , " i have the cab downstairs . " " good boy , " say , blandly . " why do n't you introduce this pattern at ? " he continue , take a pair of steel handcuff from a drawer . " see how beautifully the spring work . they fasten in an instant . " " the old pattern be good enough , " remark , " if we can only find the man to put them on . " " very good , very good , " say , smile . " the cabman may as well help me with my box . just ask him to step up , . " i be surprise to find my companion speak as though he be about to set out on a journey , since he have not say anything to me about it . there be a small portmanteau in the room , and this he pull out and begin to strap . he be busily engage at it when the cabman enter the room . " just give me a help with this buckle , cabman , " he say , kneel over his task , and never turn his head . the fellow come forward with a somewhat sullen , defiant air , and put down his hand to assist . at that instant there be a sharp click , the jangle of metal , and spring to his foot again . " gentleman , " he cry , with flash eye , " let me introduce you to , the murderer of and of . " the whole thing occur in a quickly that i have no time to realize it . i have a vivid recollection of that instant , of ' triumphant expression and the ring of his voice , of the cabman be daze , savage face , as he glare at the glitter handcuff , which have appear as if by magic upon his wrist . for a second or two we might have be a group of statue . then , with an inarticulate roar of fury , the prisoner wrench himself free from 's grasp , and hurl himself through the window . woodwork and glass give way before him ; but before he get quite through , , , and spring upon him like so many staghound . he be drag back into the room , and then commence a terrific conflict . so powerful and so fierce be he , that the four of us be shake off again and again . he appear to have the convulsive strength of a man in an epileptic fit . his face and hand be terribly mangle by his passage through the glass , but loss of blood have no effect in diminish his resistance . it be not until succeed in get his hand inside his neckcloth and him that we make him realize that his struggle be of no avail ; and even then we feel no security until we have pinion his foot as well as his hand . that do , we rise to our foot breathless and pant . " we have his cab , " say . " it will serve to take him to . and now , gentleman , " he continue , with a pleasant smile , " we have reach the end of our little mystery . you be very welcome to put any question that you like to me now , and there be no danger that i will refuse to answer them . " in the central portion of the great there lie an arid and repulsive desert , which for many a long year serve as a barrier against the advance of civilisation . from the to , and from the in the north to the upon the south , be a region of desolation and silence . nor be nature always in one mood throughout this grim district . it comprise snow-capped and lofty mountain , and dark and gloomy valley . there be river which dash through jagged caon ; and there be enormous plain , which in winter be white with snow , and in summer be grey with the saline alkali dust . they all preserve , however , the common characteristic of barrenness , inhospitality , and misery . there be no inhabitant of this land of despair . a band of or of blackfeet may occasionally traverse it in order to reach other , but the hardy of the brave be glad to lose sight of those awesome plain , and to find themselves once more upon their prairie . the coyote skulk among the scrub , the buzzard flap heavily through the air , and the clumsy grizzly bear lumber through the dark ravine , and pick up such sustenance as it can amongst the rock . these be the sole dweller in the wilderness . in the whole world there can be no more dreary view than that from the northern slope of the . as far as the eye can reach stretch the great flat , all dust over with patch of alkali , and intersect by clump of the dwarfish chaparral bush . on the extreme verge of the horizon lie a long chain of mountain peak , with their rugged summit fleck with snow . in this great stretch of country there be no sign of life , nor of anything appertain to life . there be no bird in the steel-blue heaven , no movement upon the dull , grey all , there be absolute silence . listen as one may , there be no shadow of a sound in all that mighty wilderness ; nothing but and silence . it have be say there be nothing appertain to life upon the broad plain . that be hardly true . look down from the , one see a pathway trace out across the desert , which wind away and be lose in the extreme distance . it be rut with wheel and tread down by the foot of many adventurer . here and there there be scattered white object which glisten in the sun , and stand out against the dull deposit of alkali . approach , and examine them ! they be bone : some large and coarse , other small and more delicate . the former have belong to ox , and the latter to man . for fifteen hundred mile one may trace this ghastly caravan route by these scattered remain of those who have fall by the wayside . look down on this very scene , there stand upon the fourth of , eighteen hundred and , a solitary traveller . his appearance be such that he might have be the very genius or demon of the region . an observer would have find it difficult to say whether he be near to forty or to sixty . his face be lean and haggard , and the brown skin be draw tightly over the project bone ; his long , brown hair and beard be all fleck and dash with white ; his eye be sink in his head , and burn with an unnatural lustre ; while the hand which grasp his rifle be hardly more fleshy than that of a skeleton . as he stand , he lean upon his weapon for support , and yet his tall figure and the massive framework of his bone suggest a wiry and vigorous constitution . his gaunt face , however , and his clothes , which hang so baggily over his shrivel limb , proclaim what it be that give him that senile and decrepit appearance . the man be from hunger and from thirst . he have toil painfully down the ravine , and on to this little elevation , in the vain hope of see some sign of water . now the great salt plain stretch before his eye , and the distant belt of savage mountain , without a sign anywhere of plant or tree , which might indicate the presence of moisture . in all that broad landscape there be no gleam of hope . north , and east , and west he look with wild questioning eye , and then he realise that his wandering have come to an end , and that there , on that barren crag , he be about to die . " why not here , as well as in a feather bed , twenty year hence , " he mutter , as he seat himself in the shelter of a boulder . before sit down , he have deposit upon the ground his useless rifle , and also a large bundle tie up in a grey shawl , which he have carry sling over his right shoulder . it appear to be somewhat too heavy for his strength , for in lower it , it come down on the ground with some little violence . instantly there break from the grey parcel a little moan cry , and from it there protrude a small , scared face , with very bright brown eye , and two little speckle , dimple fist . " you have hurt me ! " say a childish voice reproachfully . " have i though , " the man answer penitently , " i do n't go for to do it . " as he speak he unwrap the grey shawl and extricate a pretty little girl of about five year of age , whose dainty shoe and smart pink frock with its little linen apron all bespeak a mother 's care . the child be pale and wan , but her healthy arm and leg show that she have suffer less than her companion . " how be it now ? " he answer anxiously , for she be still rub the golden curl which cover the back of her head . " kiss it and make it well , " she say , with perfect gravity , shove @card@ the injured part up to him . " that be what mother use to do . where be mother ? " " mother be go . i guess you will see her before long . " " go , ! " say the little girl . " funny , she do n't say good-bye ; she ' most always do if she be just ' over to 's for tea , and now she have be away three day . say , it be awful dry , ai n't it ? ai n't there no water , nor nothing to eat ? " " no , there ai n't nothing , dearie . you will just need to be patient awhile , and then you will be all right . put your head up agin me like that , and then you will feel bully . it ai n't easy to talk when your lip be like leather , but i guess i will well let you know how the card lie . what be that you have get ? " " pretty thing ! fine thing ! " cry the little girl enthusiastically , hold up two glitter fragment of mica . " when we go back to home i will give them to brother . " " you will see pretty thing than them soon , " say the man confidently . " you just wait a bit . i be go to tell you remember when we leave the river ? " " oh , yes . " " well , we reckon we will strike another river soon , see . but there be ' wrong ; compass , or map , or ' , and it do n't turn up . water run out . just except a little drop for the like of you -- -- -- " " and you could n't wash yourself , " interrupt his companion gravely , stare up at his grimy visage . " no , nor drink . and , he be the to go , and then , and then , and then , and then , dearie , your mother . " " then mother be a dead too , " cry the little girl drop her face in her pinafore and sob bitterly . " yes , they all go except you and me . then i think there be some chance of water in this direction , so i heave you over my shoulder and we tramp it together . it do n't seem as though we have improve matter . there be an almighty small chance for us now ! " " do you mean that we be go to die too ? " ask the child , check her sob , and raise her face . " i guess that be about the size of it . " " why do n't you say so before ? " she say , laugh gleefully . " you give me such a fright . why , of course , now as long as we die we will be with mother again . " " yes , you will , dearie . " " and you too . i will tell her how awful good you have be . i will bet she meet us at the door of with a big pitcher of water , and a lot of buckwheat cake , hot , and toast on both side , like and me be fond of . how long will it be first ? " " i do n't very long . " the man 's eye be fix upon the northern horizon . in the blue vault of the heaven there have appear three little speck which increase in size every moment , so rapidly do they approach . they speedily resolve themselves into three large brown bird , which circle over the head of the two wanderer , and then settle upon some rock which overlook them . they be buzzard , the vulture of the west , whose come be the forerunner of death . " cock and hen , " cry the little girl gleefully , point at their ill-omened form , and clap her hand to make them rise . " say , do make this country ? " " in course he do , " say her companion , rather startle by this unexpected question . " he make the country down in , and he make the , " the little girl continue . " i guess somebody else make the country in these part . it be not nearly so well do . they forget the water and the tree . " " what would think of offer up prayer ? " the man ask diffidently . " it ai n't night yet , " she answer . " it do n't matter . it ai n't quite regular , but he wo n't mind that , you bet . you say over them one that you use to say every night in the waggon when we be on the . " " why do n't you say some yourself ? " the child ask , with wonder eye . " i disremember them , " he answer . " i hai n't say none since i be half the height o ' that gun . i guess it be never too late . you say them out , and i will stand by and come in on the chorus . " " then you will need to kneel down , and me too , " she say , lay the shawl out for that purpose . " you have get to put your hand up like this . it make you feel kind o ' good . " it be a strange sight have there be anything but the buzzard to see it . side by side on the narrow shawl kneel the two wanderer , the little prattle child and the reckless , hardened adventurer . her chubby face , and his haggard , angular visage be both turn up to the cloudless heaven in heartfelt entreaty to that dread be with whom they be face to face , while the two one thin and clear , the other deep and in the entreaty for mercy and forgiveness . the prayer finish , they resume their seat in the shadow of the boulder until the child fall asleep , nestle upon the broad breast of her protector . he watch over her slumber for some time , but prove to be too strong for him . for three day and three night he have allow himself neither rest nor repose . slowly the eyelid droop over the tired eye , and the head sink low and low upon the breast , until the man 's grizzled beard be mix with the gold tress of his companion , and both sleep the same deep and dreamless slumber . have the wanderer remain awake for another half hour a strange sight would have meet his eye . far away on the extreme verge of the alkali plain there rise up a little spray of dust , very slight at first , and hardly to be distinguish from the mist of the distance , but gradually grow high and broad until it form a solid , well-defined cloud . this cloud continue to increase in size until it become evident that it could only be raise by a great multitude of move creature . in more fertile spot the observer would have come to the conclusion that one of those great herd of bison which graze upon the prairie land be approach him . this be obviously impossible in these arid wild . as the whirl of dust draw near to the solitary bluff upon which the two castaway be repose , the tilt of waggon and the figure of armed horseman begin to show up through the haze , and the apparition reveal itself as be a great caravan upon its journey for the . but what a caravan ! when the head of it have reach the base of the mountain , the rear be not yet visible on the horizon . right across the enormous plain stretch the straggle array , waggon and cart , man on horseback , and man on foot . innumerable woman who stagger along under burden , and child who toddle beside the waggon or peep out from under the white covering . this be evidently no ordinary party of immigrant , but rather some nomad people who have be compel from stress of circumstance to seek themselves a new country . there rise through the clear air a confused clatter and rumble from this great mass of humanity , with the creak of wheel and the neigh of horse . loud as it be , it be not sufficient to rouse the two tired wayfarer above them . at the head of the column there ride a score or more of grave man , clad in sombre homespun garment and arm with rifle . on reach the base of the bluff they halt , and hold a short council among themselves . " the well be to the right , my brother , " say one , a , clean-shaven man with grizzly hair . " to the right of the we shall reach the , " say another . " fear not for water , " cry a third . " he who could draw it from the rock will not now abandon his own chosen people . " " ! ! " respond the whole party . they be about to resume their journey when one of the young and utter an exclamation and point up at the rugged crag above them . from its summit there flutter a little wisp of pink , show up hard and bright against the grey rock behind . at the sight there be a general rein up of horse and unsling of gun , while fresh horseman come gallop up to reinforce the vanguard . the word ' ' be on every lip . " there ca n't be any number of here , " say the elderly man who appear to be in command . " we have pass the , and there be no other tribe until we cross the great mountain . " " shall i go forward and see , , " ask one of the band . " and i , " " and i , " cry a dozen voice . " leave your horse below and we will await you here , " the answer . in a moment the young fellow have dismount , fasten their horse , and be ascend the precipitous slope which lead up to the object which have excite their curiosity . they advance rapidly and noiselessly , with the confidence and dexterity of practise scout . the watcher from the plain below could see them flit from rock to rock until their figure stand out against the skyline . the young man who have first give the alarm be lead them . suddenly his follower see him throw up his hand , as though overcome with astonishment , and on join him they be affect in the same way by the sight which meet their eye . on the little plateau which crown the barren hill there stand a single giant boulder , and against this boulder there lie a tall man , and , but of an excessive thinness . his placid face and regular breathing show that he be fast asleep . beside him lie a little child , with her round white arm encircle his brown sinewy neck , and her golden haired head rest upon the breast of his velveteen tunic . her rosy lip be part , show the regular line of snow-white tooth within , and a playful smile play over her infantile feature . her plump little white leg terminate in white sock and neat shoe with shine buckle , offer a strange contrast to the long shrivel member of her companion . on the ledge of rock above this strange couple there stand three solemn buzzard , who , at the sight of the new comer utter raucous scream of disappointment and flap sullenly away . the cry of the foul bird awake the two sleeper who stare about @card@ them in bewilderment . the man stagger to his foot and look down upon the plain which have be so desolate when sleep have overtake him , and which be now traverse by this enormous body of man and of beast . his face assume an expression of incredulity as he gaze , and he pass his hand over his eye . " this be what they call delirium , i guess , " he mutter . the child stand beside him , hold on to the skirt of his coat , and say nothing but look all round her with the wonder questioning gaze of childhood . the rescue party be speedily able to convince the two castaway that their appearance be no delusion . one of them seize the little girl , and hoist her upon his shoulder , while two other support her gaunt companion , and assist him towards the waggon . " my name be , " the wanderer explain ; " me and that little be all that be left o ' twenty-one people . the rest be all dead o ' thirst and hunger away down in the south . " " be she your child ? " ask someone . " i guess she be now , " the other cry , defiantly ; " she be mine ' cause i save her . no man will take her from me . she be from this day on . who be you , though ? " he continue , glance with curiosity at his stalwart , sunburned rescuer ; " there seem to be a powerful lot of . " " upon ten thousand , " say one of the young man ; " we be the persecute child of choose of the . " " i never hear tell on him , " say the wanderer . " he appear to have choose a fair crowd of . " " do not jest at that which be sacred , " say the other sternly . " we be of those who believe in those sacred writing , draw in egyptian letter on plate of beaten gold , which be hand unto the holy at . we have come from , in the of , where we have found our temple . we have come to seek a refuge from the violent man and from the godless , even though it be the heart of the desert . " the name of evidently recall recollection to . " i see , " he say , " you be the mormon . " " we be the mormon , " answer his companion with one voice . " and where be you go ? " " we do not know . the hand of be lead us under the person of our . you must come before him . he shall say what be to be do with you . " they have reach the base of the hill by this time , and be surround by crowd of the woman , strong laughing child , and anxious man . many be the cry of astonishment and of commiseration which arise from them when they perceive the youth of one of the stranger and the destitution of the other . their escort do not halt , however , but push on , follow by a great crowd of mormon , until they reach a waggon , which be conspicuous for its great size and for the gaudiness and smartness of its appearance . six horse be yoke to it , whereas the other be furnish with two , or , at most , four . beside the driver there sit a man who could not have be more than thirty year of age , but whose massive head and resolute expression mark him as a leader . he be read a volume , but as the crowd approach he lay it aside , and listen attentively to an account of the episode . then he turn to the two castaway . " if we take you with us , " he say , in solemn word , " it can only be as believer in our own creed . we shall have no wolf in our fold . well far that your bone should bleach in this wilderness than that you should prove to be that little speck of decay which in time corrupt the whole fruit . will you come with us on these term ? " " guess i will come with you on any term , " say , with such emphasis that the grave could not restrain a smile . the leader alone retain his stern , impressive expression . " take him , , " he say , " give him food and drink , and the child likewise . let it be your task also to teach him our holy creed . we have delay long enough . forward ! on , on to zion ! " " on , on to zion ! " cry the crowd of mormon , and the word ripple down the long caravan , pass from mouth to mouth until they die away in a dull murmur in the far distance . with a cracking of whip and a creak of wheel the great waggon get into motion , and soon the whole caravan be wind along once more . the to whose care the two waif have be commit , lead them to his waggon , where a meal be already await them . " you shall remain here , " he say . " in a few day you will have recover from your fatigue . in the meantime , remember that now and for ever you be of our religion . have say it , and he have speak with the voice of , which be the voice of . " this be not the place to commemorate the trial and privation endure by the immigrant mormon before they come to their final haven . from the shore of the to the western slope of the they have struggle on with a constancy almost unparalleled in history . the savage man , and the savage beast , hunger , thirst , fatigue , and impediment which could place in the way , have all be overcome with anglo-saxon tenacity . yet the long journey and the accumulate terror have shake the heart of the stout among them . there be not one who do not sink upon his knee in heartfelt prayer when they see the broad valley of bath in the sunlight beneath them , and learn from the lip of their leader that this be the promised land , and that these virgin acre be to be theirs for evermore . speedily prove himself to be a skilful administrator as well as a resolute chief . map be draw and chart prepare , in which the future city be sketch out . all around farm be apportion and allot in proportion to the standing of each individual . the tradesman be put to his trade and the artisan to his calling . in the town street and square spring up , as if by magic . in the country there be draining and hedging , plant and clear , until the next summer see the whole country golden with the wheat crop . everything prosper in the strange settlement . above all , the great temple which they have erect in the centre of the city grow ever tall and large . from the first blush of dawn until the closing of the twilight , the clatter of the hammer and the rasp of the saw be never absent from the monument which the immigrant erect to who have lead them safe through many danger . the two castaway , and the little girl who have share his fortune and have be adopt as his daughter , accompany the mormon to the end of their great pilgrimage . be bear along pleasantly enough in 's waggon , a retreat which she share with the 's three wife and with his son , a headstrong forward boy of twelve . have rally , with the elasticity of childhood , from the shock cause by her mother 's death , she soon become a pet with the woman , and reconcile herself to this new life in her move home . in the meantime have recover from his privation , distinguish himself as a useful guide and an indefatigable hunter . so rapidly do he gain the esteem of his new companion , that when they reach the end of their wandering , it be unanimously agree that he should be provide with as large and as fertile a tract of land as any of the settler , with the exception of himself , and of , , , and , who be the four principal . on the farm thus acquire build himself a substantial , which receive so many addition in succeed year that it grow into a roomy villa . he be a man of a practical turn of mind , keen in his dealing and skilful with his hand . his iron constitution enable him to work morning and evening at improve and till his land . hence it come about that his farm and all that belong to him prosper exceedingly . in three year he be well off than his neighbour , in six he be well-to-do , in nine he be rich , and in twelve there be not half a dozen man in the whole of who could compare with him . from the great inland sea to the distant there be no name well know than that of . there be one way and only one in which he offend the susceptibility of his co-religionist . no argument or persuasion could ever induce him to set up a female establishment after the manner of his companion . he never give reason for this persistent refusal , but content himself by resolutely and inflexibly adhere to his determination . there be some who accuse him of lukewarmness in his adopt religion , and other who put it down to greed of wealth and reluctance to incur expense . other , again , speak of some early love affair , and of a fair-haired girl who have pine away on the shore of the . whatever the reason , remain strictly celibate . in every other respect he conform to the religion of the young settlement , and gain the name of be an orthodox and man . grow up within the , and assist her adopt father in all his undertaking . the keen air of the mountain and the balsamic odour of the pine tree take the place of nurse and mother to the young girl . as year succeed to year she grow tall and strong , her cheek more , and her step more elastic . many a wayfarer upon the high road which run by 's farm feel thought revive in their mind as they watch her lithe girlish figure trip through the , or meet her mount upon her father 's mustang , and manage it with all the ease and grace of a true child of the . so the bud blossom into a flower , and the year which see her father the rich of the farmer leave her as fair a specimen of american girlhood as could be find in the whole slope . it be not the father , however , who first discover that the child have develop into the woman . it seldom be in such case . that mysterious change be too subtle and too gradual to be measure by date . least of all do the maiden herself know it until the tone of a voice or the touch of a hand set her heart thrill within her , and she learn , with a mixture of pride and of fear , that a new and a large nature have awake within her . there be few who can recall that day and remember the one little incident which herald the dawn of a new life . in the case of the occasion be serious enough in itself , apart from its future influence on her destiny and that of many besides . it be a warm morning , and the be as busy as the bee whose hive they have choose for their emblem . in the field and in the street rise the same hum of human industry . down the dusty high road defile long stream of mule , all head to the west , for the gold fever have break out in , and the lie through the of the elect . there , too , be drove of sheep and bullock come in from the outlying pasture land , and train of tired immigrant , man and horse equally weary of their interminable journey . through all this motley assemblage , thread her way with the skill of an accomplished rider , there gallop , her fair face flush with the exercise and her long chestnut hair float out behind her . she have a commission from her father in the , and be dash in as she have do many a time before , with all the fearlessness of youth , think only of her task and how it be to be perform . the travel-stained adventurer gaze after her in astonishment , and even the unemotional indian , journey in with their , relax their accustomed stoicism as they marvel at the beauty of the maiden . she have reach the outskirt of the city when she find the road block by a great drove of cattle , drive by a half-dozen herdsman from the plain . in her impatience she endeavour to pass this obstacle by push her horse into what appear to be a gap . scarcely have she get fairly into it , however , before the beast close in behind her , and she find herself completely imbed in the move stream of , bullock . accustom as she be to deal with cattle , she be not alarm at her situation , but take advantage of every opportunity to urge her horse on in the hope of push her way through the cavalcade . unfortunately the horn of one of the creature , either by accident or design , come in violent contact with the flank of the mustang , and excite it to madness . in an instant it rear up upon its hind leg with a snort of rage , and prance and toss in a way that would have unseat any but a most skilful rider . the situation be full of peril . every plunge of the excited horse bring it against the horn again , and goad it to fresh madness . it be all that the girl could do to keep herself in the saddle , yet a slip would mean a terrible death under the hoof of the unwieldy and terrify animal . unaccustomed to sudden emergency , her head begin to swim , and her grip upon the bridle to relax . choke by the rise cloud of dust and by the steam from the struggle creature , she might have abandon her effort in despair , but for a kindly voice at her elbow which assure her of assistance . at the same moment a sinewy brown hand catch the frightened horse by the curb , and force a way through the drove , soon bring her to the outskirt . " you be not hurt , i hope , miss , " say her preserver , respectfully . she look up at his dark , fierce face , and laugh saucily . " i be awful frightened , " she say , naively ; " whoever would have think that would have be so scare by a lot of cow ? " " thank you keep your seat , " the other say earnestly . he be a tall , young fellow , mount on a powerful roan horse , and clad in the rough dress of a hunter , with a long rifle sling over his shoulder . " i guess you be the daughter of , " he remark , " i see you ride down from his house . when you see him , ask him if he remember the of . if he be the same , my father and he be pretty thick . " " have n't you well come and ask yourself ? " she ask , demurely . the young fellow seem please at the suggestion , and his dark eye sparkle with pleasure . " i will do so , " he say , " we have be in the mountain for two month , and be not over and above in visit condition . he must take us as he find us . " " he have a good deal to thank you for , and so have i , " she answer , " he be awful fond of me . if those cow have jump on me he will have never get over it . " " neither would i , " say her companion . " you ! well , i do n't see that it would make much matter to you , anyhow . you ai n't even a friend of ours . " the young hunter 's dark face grow so gloomy over this remark that laugh aloud . " there , i do n't mean that , " she say ; " of course , you be a friend now . you must come and see us . now i must push along , or father wo n't trust me with his business any more . good-bye ! " " good-bye , " he answer , raise his broad sombrero , and bend over her little hand . she wheel her mustang round , give it a cut with her , and dart away down the broad road in a rolling cloud of dust . ride on with his companion , gloomy and taciturn . he and they have be among the prospect for silver , and be return to in the hope of raise capital enough to work some lode which they have discover . he have be as keen as any of them upon the business until this sudden incident have draw his thought into another channel . the sight of the fair young girl , as frank and wholesome as the breeze , have stir his volcanic , untamed heart to its very depth . when she have vanish from his sight , he realize that a crisis have come in his life , and that neither silver speculation nor any other question could ever be of such importance to him as this new and one . the love which have spring up in his heart be not the sudden , changeable fancy of a boy , but rather the wild , fierce passion of a man of strong will and imperious temper . he have be accustom to succeed in all that he undertake . he swear in his heart that he would not fail in this if human effort and human perseverance could render him successful . he call on that night , and many time again , until his face be a familiar one at the . , coop up in the valley , and absorb in his work , have have little chance of learn the news of the outside world during the last twelve year . all this be able to tell him , and in a style which interest as well as her father . he have be a pioneer in , and could narrate many a strange tale of fortune make and fortune lose in those wild , halcyon day . he have be a scout too , and a trapper , a silver explorer , and a . wherever stirring adventure be to be have , have be there in search of them . he soon become a favourite with the old farmer , who speak eloquently of his virtue . on such occasion , be silent , but her blush cheek and her bright , happy eye , show only too clearly that her young heart be no longer her own . her honest father may not have observe these symptom , but they be assuredly not throw away upon the man who have win her affection . it be a summer evening when he come gallop down the road and pull up at the gate . she be at the doorway , and come down to meet him . he throw the bridle over the fence and stride up the pathway . " i be off , , " he say , take her two hand in his , and gaze tenderly down into her face ; " i wo n't ask you to come with me now , but will you be ready to come when i be here again ? " " and when will that be ? " she ask , blush and laugh . " a couple of month at the outside . i will come and claim you then , my darling . there be no one who can stand between us . " " and how about father ? " she ask . " he have give his consent , provide we get these mine work all right . i have no fear on that head . " " oh , well ; of course , if you and father have arrange it all , there be no more to be say , " she whisper , with her cheek against his broad breast . " thank ! " he say , hoarsely , stoop and kiss her . " it be settle , then . the longer i stay , the harder it will be to go . they be wait for me at the caon . good-bye , my own . in two month you shall see me . " he tear himself from her as he speak , and , fling himself upon his horse , gallop furiously away , never even look round , as though afraid that his resolution might fail him if he take one glance at what he be leave . she stand at the gate , gaze after him until he vanish from her sight . then she walk back into the house , the happy girl in all . three week have pass since and his comrade have depart from . 's heart be sore within him when he think of the young man 's return , and of the impending loss of his adopt child . yet her bright and happy face reconcile him to the arrangement more than any argument could have do . he have always determine , deep down in his resolute heart , that nothing would ever induce him to allow his daughter to wed a mormon . such a marriage he regard as no marriage at all , but as a shame and a disgrace . whatever he might think of the mormon doctrine , upon that one point he be inflexible . he have to seal his mouth on the subject , however , for to express an unorthodox opinion be a dangerous matter in those day in the land of the . yes , a dangerous dangerous that even the most saintly dare only whisper their religious opinion with bate breath , lest something which fall from their lip might be misconstrue , and bring down a swift retribution upon them . the victim of persecution have now turn persecutor on their own account , and persecutor of the most terrible description . not the inquisition of , nor the german , nor the of , be ever able to put a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast a cloud over the of . its invisibility , and the mystery which be attach to it , make this organization doubly terrible . it appear to be omniscient and omnipotent , and yet be neither see nor hear . the man who hold out against the vanish away , and none know whither he have go or what have befall him . his wife and his child await him at home , but no father ever return to tell them how he have fare at the hand of his secret judge . a rash word or a hasty act be follow by annihilation , and yet none know what the nature might be of this terrible power which be suspend over them . no wonder that man go about in fear and tremble , and that even in the heart of the wilderness they dare not whisper the doubt which oppress them . at first this vague and terrible power be exercise only upon the recalcitrant who , have embrace the mormon faith , wish afterwards to pervert or to abandon it . soon , however , it take a wide range . the supply of adult woman be run short , and polygamy without a female population on which to draw be a barren doctrine indeed . strange rumour begin to be bandy of murder immigrant and rifle camp in region where have never be see . fresh woman appear in the harem of the who pine and weep , and bear upon their face the trace of an horror . belated wanderer upon the mountain speak of gang of armed man , masked , stealthy , and noiseless , who flit by them in the darkness . these tale and rumour take substance and shape , and be corroborate and , until they resolve themselves into a definite name . to this day , in the lonely ranch of the , the name of the , or the , be a sinister and an ill-omened one . full knowledge of the organization which produce such terrible result serve to increase rather than to lessen the horror which it inspire in the mind of man . none know who belong to this ruthless society . the name of the participator in the deed of blood and violence do under the name of religion be keep profoundly secret . the very friend to whom you communicate your misgiving as to the and his mission , might be one of those who would come forth at night with fire and sword to exact a terrible reparation . hence every man fear his neighbour , and none speak of the thing which be nearest his heart . one fine morning , be about to set out to his , when he hear the click of the latch , and , look through the window , see a stout , sandy-haired , middle-aged man come up the pathway . his heart leap to his mouth , for this be none other than the great himself . full of he know that such a visit bode him little run to the door to greet the mormon chief . the latter , however , receive his salutation coldly , and follow him with a stern face into the sitting-room . " brother , " he say , take a seat , and eye the farmer keenly from under his light-coloured eyelash , " the true believer have be good friend to you . we pick you up when you be starve in the desert , we share our food with you , lead you safe to the , give you a goodly share of land , and allow you to wax rich under our protection . be not this so ? " " it be so , " answer . " in return for all this we ask but one condition : that be , that you should embrace the true faith , and conform in every way to its usage . this you promise to do , and this , if common report say truly , you have neglect . " " and how have i neglect it ? " ask , throw out his hand in expostulation . " have i not give to the common fund ? have i not attend at the ? have i not -- -- -- ? " " where be your wife ? " ask , look round him . " call them in , that i may greet them . " " it be true that i have not marry , " answer . " but woman be few , and there be many who have good claim than i be not a lonely man : i have my daughter to attend to my want . " " it be of that daughter that i would speak to you , " say the leader of the mormon . " she have grow to be the flower of , and have find favour in the eye of many who be high in the land . " groan internally . " there be storey of her which i would fain that she be seal to some . this must be the gossip of idle tongue . what be the thirteenth rule in the code of the sainted ? ' let every maiden of the true faith marry one of the elect ; for if she wed a gentile , she commit a grievous sin . ' this being so , it be impossible that you , who profess the holy creed , should suffer your daughter to violate it . " make no answer , but he play nervously with his . " upon this one point your whole faith shall be it have be decide in the of four . the girl be young , and we would not have her wed grey hair , neither would we deprive her of all choice . we have many heifer , @card@ but our child must also be provide . have a son , and have a son , and either of them would gladly welcome your daughter to their house . let her choose between them . they be young and rich , and of the true faith . what say you to that ? " remain silent for some little time with his brow knit . " you will give us time , " he say at last . " my daughter be very be scarce of an age to marry . " " she shall have a month to choose , " say , rise from his seat . " at the end of that time she shall give her answer . " he be pass through the door , when he turn , with flush face and flash eye . " it be well for you , , " he thunder , " that you and she be now lie blanch skeleton upon the , than that you should put your weak will against the order of the ! " with a threatening gesture of his hand , he turn from the door , and hear his heavy step scrunch along the shingly path . he be still sit with his elbow upon his knee , consider how he should broach the matter to his daughter when a soft hand be lay upon his , and look up , he see her standing beside him . one glance at her pale , frightened face show him that she have hear what have pass . " i could not help it , " she say , in answer to his look . " his voice ring through the house . oh , father , father , what shall we do ? " " do n't you scare yourself , " he answer , draw her to him , and pass his broad , rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair . " we will fix it up somehow or another . you do n't find your fancy kind o ' lessen for this chap , do you ? " a sob and a squeeze of his hand be her only answer . " no ; of course not . i should n't care to hear you say you do . he be a likely lad , and he be a , which be more than these folk here , in spite o ' all their pray and preach . there be a party start for , and i will manage to send him a message let him know the hole we be in . if i know anything o ' that young man , he will be back here with a speed that would whip . " laugh through her tear at her father 's description . " when he come , he will advise us for the good . but it be for you that i be frighten , dear . one hear such dreadful storey about those who oppose the : something terrible always happen to them . " " but we have n't oppose him yet , " her father answer . " it will be time to look out for squall when we do . we have a clear month before us ; at the end of that , i guess we have well shin out of . " " leave ! " " that be about the size of it . " " but the farm ? " " we will raise as much as we can in money , and let the rest go . to tell the truth , , it be n't the first time i have think of do it . i do n't care about under to any man , as these folk do to their darned prophet . i be a , and it be all new to me . guess i be too old to learn . if he come browse about this farm , he might chance to run up against a charge of buckshot travel in the opposite direction . " " but they wo n't let us leave , " his daughter object . " wait till come , and we will soon manage that . in the meantime , do n't you fret yourself , my dearie , and do n't get your eye swell up , else he will be walk into me when he see you . there be nothing to be afeared about , and there be no danger at all . " utter these console remark in a very confident tone , but she could not help observe that he pay unusual care to the fastening of the door that night , and that he carefully clean and load the rusty old shotgun which hang upon the wall of his bedroom . on the morning which follow his interview with the , go in to , and have find his acquaintance , who be bind for the , he entrust him with his message to . in it he tell the young man of the imminent danger which threaten them , and how necessary it be that he should return . have do thus he feel easy in his mind , and return home with a light heart . as he approach his farm , he be surprise to see a horse hitch to each of the post of the gate . still more surprised be he on enter to find two young man in possession of his sitting-room . one , with a long pale face , be lean back in the rocking-chair , with his foot cock up upon the stove . the other , a bull-necked youth with coarse bloated feature , be stand in front of the window with his hand in his pocket , whistle a popular hymn . both of them nod to as he enter , and the one in the rocking-chair commence the conversation . " maybe you do n't know us , " he say . " this here be the son of , and i be , who travel with you in the desert when the stretch out his hand and gather you into the true fold . " " as he will all the nation in his own good time , " say the other in a nasal voice ; " he slowly but exceed small . " bow coldly . he have guess who his visitor be . " we have come , " continue , " at the advice of our father to solicit the hand of your daughter for whichever of us may seem good to you and to her . as i have but four wife and here have seven , it appear to me that my claim be the strong one . " " , nay , , " cry the other ; " the question be not how many wife we have , but how many we can keep . my father have now give over his mill to me , and i be the rich man . " " but my prospect be good , " say the other , warmly . " when the remove my father , i shall have his tan yard and his leather factory . then i be your elder , and be higher in the church . " " it will be for the maiden to decide , " rejoin young , smirk at his own reflection in the glass . " we will leave it all to her decision . " during this dialogue , have stand fume in the doorway , hardly able to keep his from the back of his two visitor . " look here , " he say at last , stride up to them , " when my daughter summon you , you can come , but until then i do n't want to see your face again . " the two young mormon stare at him in amazement . in their eye this competition between them for the maiden 's hand be the high of honour both to her and her father . " there be two way out of the room , " cry ; " there be the door , and there be the window . which do you care to use ? " his brown face look so savage , and his gaunt hand so threaten , that his visitor spring to their foot and beat a hurried retreat . the old farmer follow them to the door . " let me know when you have settle which it be to be , " he say , sardonically . " you shall smart for this ! " cry , white with rage . " you have defy the and the of . you shall rue it to the end of your day . " " the hand of the shall be heavy upon you , " cry young ; " he will arise and smite you ! " " then i will start the smite , " exclaim furiously , and would have rush upstairs for his gun have not seize him by the arm and restrain him . before he could escape from her , the clatter of horse ' hoof tell him that they be beyond his reach . " the young cant rascal ! " he exclaim , wipe the perspiration from his forehead ; " i would sooner see you in your grave , my girl , than the wife of either of them . " " and so should i , father , " she answer , with spirit ; " but will soon be here . " " yes . it will not be long before he come . the sooner the good , for we do not know what their next move may be . " it be , indeed , high time that someone capable of give advice and help should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopt daughter . in the whole history of the settlement there have never be such a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the . if minor error be punish so sternly , what would be the fate of this arch rebel . know that his wealth and position would be of no avail to him . other as well know and as rich as himself have be spirite away before now , and their good give over to the church . he be a brave man , but he tremble at the vague , shadowy terror which hang over him . any know danger he could face with a firm lip , but this suspense be unnerving . he conceal his fear from his daughter , however , and affect to make light of the whole matter , though she , with the keen eye of love , see plainly that he be ill at ease . he expect that he would receive some message or remonstrance from as to his conduct , and he be not mistake , though it come in an unlooked-for manner . upon rise next morning he find , to his surprise , a small square of paper pin on to the coverlet of his bed just over his chest . on it be print , in bold straggle letter : -- - " day be give you for amendment , and then -- -- -- " the dash be more than any threat could have be . how this warning come into his room puzzle sorely , for his servant sleep in an outhouse , and the door and window have all be secure . he crumple the paper up and say nothing to his daughter , but the incident strike a chill into his heart . the day be evidently the balance of the month which have promise . what strength or courage could avail against an enemy arm with such mysterious power ? the hand which fasten that pin might have strike him to the heart , and he could never have know who have slay him . still more shake be he next morning . they have sit down to their breakfast when with a cry of surprise point upwards . in the centre of the ceiling be scrawl , with a burned stick apparently , the number @card@ . to his daughter it be unintelligible , and he do not enlighten her . that night he sit up with his gun and keep watch and ward . he see and he hear nothing , and yet in the morning a great @card@ have be paint upon the outside of his door . thus day follow day ; and as sure as morning come he find that his unseen enemy have keep their register , and have mark up in some conspicuous position how many day be still leave to him out of the month of grace . sometimes the fatal number appear upon the wall , sometimes upon the floor , occasionally they be on small placard stick upon the garden gate or the railing . with all his vigilance could not discover whence these daily warning proceed . a horror which be almost superstitious come upon him at the sight of them . he become haggard and restless , and his eye have the troubled look of some hunted creature . he have but one hope in life now , and that be for the arrival of the young hunter from . twenty have change to fifteen and fifteen to ten , but there be no news of the absentee . one by one the number dwindle down , and still there come no sign of him . whenever a horseman clatter down the road , or a driver shout at his team , the old farmer hurry to the gate think that help have arrive at last . at last , when he see five give way to four and that again to three , he lose heart , and abandon all hope of escape . single-handed , and with his limited knowledge of the mountain which surround the settlement , he know that he be powerless . the road be strictly watch and guard , and none could pass along them without an order from the . turn which way he would , there appear to be no avoid the blow which hang over him . yet the old man never waver in his resolution to part with life itself before he consent to what he regard as his daughter 's dishonour . he be sit alone one evening ponder deeply over his trouble , and search vainly for some way out of them . that morning have show the figure 2 upon the wall of his house , and the next day would be the last of the allot time . what be to happen then ? all manner of vague and terrible fancy fill his imagination . and his be to become of her after he be go ? be there no escape from the invisible network which be draw all round them . he sink his head upon the table and sob at the thought of his own impotence . what be that ? in the silence he hear a gentle scratch , but very distinct in the quiet of the night . it come from the door of the house . creep into the hall and listen intently . there be a pause for a few moment , and then the low insidious sound be repeat . someone be evidently tap very gently upon one of the panel of the door . be it some midnight assassin who have come to carry out the murderous order of the secret tribunal ? or be it some agent who be mark up that the last day of grace have arrive . feel that instant death would be good than the suspense which shake his nerve and chill his heart . spring forward he draw the bolt and throw the door open . outside all be calm and quiet . the night be fine , and the star be twinkle brightly overhead . the little front garden lie before the farmer 's eye bound by the fence and gate , but neither there nor on the road be any human be to be see . with a sigh of relief , look to right and to left , until happen to glance straight down at his own foot he see to his astonishment a man lie flat upon his face upon the ground , with arm and leg all . so unnerve be he at the sight that he lean up against the wall with his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out . his first thought be that the prostrate figure be that of some wounded or die man , but as he watch it he see it writhe along the ground and into the hall with the rapidity and noiselessness of a serpent . once within the house the man spring to his foot , close the door , and reveal to the astonish farmer the fierce face and resolute expression of . " good ! " gasp . " how you scare me ! whatever make you come in like that . " " give me food , " the other say , hoarsely . " i have have no time for bite or sup for hour . " he fling himself upon the @card@ cold meat and bread which be still lie upon the table from his host 's supper , and devour it voraciously . " do bear up well ? " he ask , when he have satisfy his hunger . " yes . she do not know the danger , " her father answer . " that be well . the house be watch on every side . that be why i crawl my way up to it . they may be darn sharp , but they be not quite sharp enough to catch a hunter . " feel a different man now that he realize that he have a devoted ally . he seize the young man 's leathery hand and wring it cordially . " you be a man to be proud of , " he say . " there be not many who would come to share our danger and our trouble . " " you have hit it there , pard , " the young hunter answer . " i have a respect for you , but if you be alone in this business i will think twice before i put my head into such a hornet 's nest . it be that bring me here , and before harm come on her i guess there will be one less o ' the family in . " " what be we to do ? " " be your last day , and unless you act you be lose . i have a mule and two horse wait in the . how much money have you ? " " two thousand dollar in gold , and five in note . " " that will do . i have as much more to add to it . we must push for through the mountain . you have well wake . it be as well that the servant do not sleep in the house . " while be absent , prepare his daughter for the approach journey , pack all the eatables that he could find into a small parcel , and fill a stoneware jar with water , for he know by experience that the mountain well be few and far between . he have hardly complete his arrangement before the farmer return with his daughter all dress and ready for a start . the greeting between the lover be warm , but brief , for minute be precious , and there be much to be do . " we must make our start at once , " say , speak in a low but resolute voice , like one who realize the greatness of the peril , but have steel his heart to meet it . " the front and back entrance be watch , but with caution we may get away through the side window and across the field . once on the road we be only two mile from the where the horse be wait . by daybreak we should be half-way through the mountain . " " what if we be stop , " ask . hope slap the revolver butt which protrude from the front of his tunic . " if they be too many for us we shall take two or three of them with us , " he say with a sinister smile . the light inside the house have all be extinguish , and from the darken window peer over the field which have be his own , and which he be now about to abandon for ever . he have long nerve himself to the sacrifice , however , and the thought of the honour and happiness of his daughter outweigh any regret at his ruin fortune . all look so peaceful and happy , the rustle tree and the broad silent stretch of , that it be difficult to realize that the spirit of murder lurk through it all . yet the white face and set expression of the young hunter show that in his approach to the house he have see enough to satisfy him upon that head . carry the bag of gold and note , have the scanty provision and water , while have a small bundle contain a few of her more value possession . open the window very slowly and carefully , they wait until a dark cloud have somewhat obscure the night , and then one by one pass through into the little garden . with bate breath and crouch figure they stumble across it , and gain the shelter of the hedge , which they skirt until they come to the gap which open into the cornfield . they have just reach this point when the young man seize his two companion and drag them down into the shadow , where they lie silent and tremble . it be as well that his prairie training have give the ear of a lynx . he and his friend have hardly crouch down before the melancholy hoot of a mountain owl be hear within a few yard of them , which be immediately answer by another hoot at a small distance . at the same moment a vague shadowy figure emerge from the gap for which they have be make , and utter the plaintive signal cry again , on which a second man appear out of the obscurity . " at midnight , " say the first who appear to be in authority . " when the call three time . " " it be well , " return the other . " shall i tell ? " " pass it on to him , and from him to the other . nine to seven ! " " seven to five ! " repeat the other , and the two figure flit away in different direction . their conclude word have evidently be some form of sign and countersign . the instant that their footstep have die away in the distance , spring to his foot , and help his companion through the gap , lead the way across the field at the top of his speed , support and the girl when her strength appear to fail her . " hurry on ! hurry on ! " he gasp from time to time . " we be through the line of sentinel . everything depend on speed . hurry on ! " once on the high road they make rapid progress . only once do they meet anyone , and then they manage to slip into a field , and so avoid recognition . before reach the town the hunter branch away into a rugged and narrow footpath which lead to the mountain . two dark jagged peak loom above them through the darkness , and the defile which lead between them be the in which the horse be await them . with unerring instinct pick his way among the great boulder and along the bed of a dried-up watercourse , until he come to the retire corner , screen with rock , where the faithful animal have be picket . the girl be place upon the mule , and old upon one of the horse , with his , while lead the other along the precipitous and dangerous path . it be a bewilder route for anyone who be not accustom to face nature in her wild mood . on the one side a great crag towered up a thousand foot or more , black , stern , and menace , with long column upon its rugged surface like the rib of some petrify monster . on the other hand a wild chaos of boulder and debris make all advance impossible . between the two run the irregular track , so narrow in place that they have to travel in indian file , and so rough that only practise rider could have traverse it at all . yet in spite of all danger and difficulty , the heart of the fugitive be light within them , for every step increase the distance between them and the terrible despotism from which they be fly . they soon have a proof , however , that they be still within the jurisdiction of the . they have reach the very wild and most desolate portion of the pass when the girl give a startle cry , and point upwards . on a rock which overlook the track , show out dark and plain against the sky , there stand a solitary sentinel . he see them as soon as they perceive him , and his military challenge of " who go there ? " ring through the silent ravine . " traveller for , " say , with his hand upon the rifle which hang by his saddle . they could see the lonely watcher finger his gun , and peer down at them as if dissatisfy at their reply . " by whose permission ? " he ask . " the , " answer . his mormon experience have teach him that that be the high authority to which he could refer . " nine from seven , " cry the sentinel . " seven from five , " return promptly , remember the countersign which he have hear in the garden . " pass , and the go with you , " say the voice from above . beyond his post the path broaden out , and the horse be able to break into a trot . look back , they could see the solitary watcher lean upon his gun , and know that they have pass the outlying post of the choose people , and that freedom lie before them . all night their course lie through intricate defile and over irregular and path . more than once they lose their way , but 's intimate knowledge of the mountain enable them to regain the track once more . when morning break , a scene of marvellous though savage beauty lie before them . in every direction the great snow-capped peak hem them in , peep over each other 's shoulder to the far horizon . so steep be the rocky bank on either side of them , that the larch and the pine seem to be suspend over their head , and to need only a gust of wind to come hurtle down upon them . nor be the fear entirely an illusion , for the barren valley be thickly strew with tree and boulder which have fall in a similar manner . even as they pass , a great rock come thunder down with a hoarse rattle which wake the echo in the silent gorge , and startle the weary horse into a gallop . as the sun rise slowly above the eastern horizon , the cap of the great mountain light up one after the other , like lamp at a festival , until they be all ruddy and glowing . the magnificent spectacle cheer the heart of the three fugitive and give them fresh energy . at a wild torrent which sweep out of a ravine they call a halt and water their horse , while they partake of a hasty breakfast . and her father would fain have rest longer , but be inexorable . " they will be upon our track by this time , " he say . " everything depend upon our speed . once safe in we may rest for the remainder of our life . " during the whole of that day they struggle on through the defile , and by evening they calculate that they be more than thirty mile from their enemy . at night-time they choose the base of a beetle crag , where the rock offer some protection from the chill wind , and there huddle together for warmth , they enjoy a few hour ' sleep . before daybreak , however , they be up and on their way once more . they have see no sign of any pursuer , and begin to think that they be fairly out of the reach of the terrible organization whose enmity they have incur . he little know how far that iron grasp could reach , or how soon it be to close upon them and crush them . about the middle of the second day of their flight their scanty store of provision begin to run out . this give the hunter little uneasiness , however , for there be game to be have among the mountain , and he have frequently before have to depend upon his rifle for the need of life . choose a sheltered nook , he pile together a few dry branch and make a blaze fire , at which his companion might warm themselves , for they be now nearly five thousand foot above the sea level , and the air be bitter and keen . have tether the horse , and bid adieu , he throw his gun over his shoulder , and set out in search of whatever chance might throw in his way . look back he see the old man and the young girl crouch over the blaze fire , while the three animal stand motionless in the . then the intervene rock hide them from his view . he walk for a couple of mile through one ravine after another without success , though from the mark upon the bark of the tree , and other indication , he judge that there be numerous bear in the vicinity . at last , after two or three hour ' fruitless search , he be think of turn back in despair , when cast his eye upwards he see a sight which send a thrill of pleasure through his heart . on the edge of a jut pinnacle , three or four hundred foot above him , there stand a creature somewhat resemble a sheep in appearance , but arm with a pair of gigantic horn . the so it be act , probably , as a guardian over a flock which be invisible to the hunter ; but fortunately it be head in the opposite direction , and have not perceive him . lie on his face , he rest his rifle upon a rock , and take a long and steady aim before draw the trigger . the animal spring into the air , totter for a moment upon the edge of the precipice , and then come crash down into the valley beneath . the creature be too unwieldy to lift , so the hunter content himself with cut away one haunch and part of the flank . with this trophy over his shoulder , he hasten to retrace his step , for the evening be already draw in . he have hardly start , however , before he realize the difficulty which face him . in his eagerness he have wander far past the ravine which be know to him , and it be no easy matter to pick out the path which he have take . the valley in which he find himself divide and into many gorge , which be so like each other that it be impossible to distinguish one from the other . he follow one for a mile or more until he come to a mountain torrent which he be sure that he have never see before . convince that he have take the wrong turn , he try another , but with the same result . night be come on rapidly , and it be almost dark before he at last find himself in a defile which be familiar to him . even then it be no easy matter to keep to the right track , for the moon have not yet rise , and the high cliff on either side make the obscurity more profound . weigh down with his burden , and weary from his exertion , he stumble along , keep up his heart by the reflection that every step bring him near to , and that he carry with him enough to ensure them food for the remainder of their journey . he have now come to the mouth of the very defile in which he have leave them . even in the darkness he could recognize the outline of the cliff which bound it . they must , he reflect , be await him anxiously , for he have be absent nearly five hour . in the gladness of his heart he put his hand to his mouth and make the glen re-echo to a loud halloo as a signal that he be come . he pause and listen for an answer . none come save his own cry , which clatter up the dreary silent ravine , and be bear back to his ear in countless repetition . again he shout , even louder than before , and again no whisper come back from the friend whom he have leave such a short time ago . a vague , nameless dread come over him , and he hurry onwards frantically , drop the precious food in his agitation . when he turn the corner , he come full in sight of the spot where the fire have be light . there be still a glowing pile of wood ash there , but it have evidently not be tend since his departure . the same dead silence still reign all round . with his fear all change to conviction , he hurry on . there be no live creature near the remain of the fire : animal , man , maiden , all be go . it be only too clear that some sudden and terrible disaster have occur during his disaster which have embrace them all , and yet have leave no trace behind it . bewilder and stun by this blow , feel his head spin round , and have to lean upon his rifle to save himself from fall . he be essentially a man of action , however , and speedily recover from his temporary impotence . seize a piece of wood from the smoulder fire , he blow it into a flame , and proceed with its help to examine the little camp . the ground be all stamp down by the foot of horse , show that a large party of mounted man have overtake the fugitive , and the direction of their track prove that they have afterwards turn back to . have they carry back both of his companion with them ? have almost persuade himself that they must have do so , when his eye fall upon an object which make every nerve of his body tingle within him . a little way on one side of the camp be a low-lying heap of reddish soil , which have assuredly not be there before . there be no mistake it for anything but a grave . as the young hunter approach it , he perceive that a stick have be plant on it , with a sheet of paper stick in the cleft fork of it . the inscription upon the paper be brief , but to the point : john , of , @card@ die 4th , @card@ . the sturdy old man , whom he have leave so short a time before , be go , then , and this be all his epitaph . look wildly round to see if there be a second grave , but there be no sign of one . have be carry back by their terrible pursuer to fulfil her original destiny , by become one of the harem of the 's son . as the young fellow realize the certainty of her fate , and his own powerlessness to prevent it , he wish that he , too , be lie with the old farmer in his last silent . again , however , his active spirit shake off the lethargy which spring from despair . if there be nothing else leave to him , he could at least devote his life to revenge . with indomitable patience and perseverance , possess also a power of sustained vindictiveness , which he may have learn from the amongst whom he have live . as he stand by the desolate fire , he feel that the only one thing which could assuage his grief would be thorough and complete retribution , bring by his own hand upon his enemy . his strong will and untiring energy should , he determine , be devote to that one end . with a grim , white face , he retrace his step to where he have drop the food , and have stir up the smoulder fire , he cook enough to last him for a few day . this he make up into a bundle , and , tired as he be , he set himself to walk back through the mountain upon the track of the avenge angel . for five day he toil footsore and weary through the defile which he have already traverse on horseback . at night he fling himself down among the rock , and snatch a few hour of sleep ; but before daybreak he be always well on his way . on the sixth day , he reach the , from which they have commence their ill-fated flight . thence he could look down upon the home of the saint . wear and exhaust , he lean upon his rifle and shake his gaunt hand fiercely at the silent widespread city beneath him . as he look at it , he observe that there be flag in some of the principal street , and other sign of festivity . he be still speculate as to what this might mean when he hear the clatter of horse 's hoof , and see a mount man ride towards him . as he approach , he recognize him as a mormon name , to whom he have render service at different time . he therefore accost him when he get up to him , with the object of find out what 's fate have be . " i be , " he say . " you remember me . " the mormon look at him with undisguised , it be difficult to recognize in this tatter , unkempt wanderer , with ghastly white face and fierce , wild eye , the spruce young hunter of former day . have , however , at last , satisfy himself as to his identity , the man 's surprise change to consternation . " you be mad to come here , " he cry . " it be as much as my own life be worth to be see talk with you . there be a warrant against you from the for assist the away . " " i do n't fear them , or their warrant , " say , earnestly . " you must know something of this matter , . i conjure you by everything you hold dear to answer a few question . we have always be friend . for 's sake , do n't refuse to answer me . " " what be it ? " the mormon ask uneasily . " be quick . the very rock have ear and the tree eye . " " what have become of ? " " she be marry yesterday to young . hold up , man , hold up , you have no life leave in you . " " do n't mind me , " say faintly . he be white to the very lip , and have sink down on the stone against which he have be lean . " marry , you say ? " " married be what those flag be for on the . there be some word between young and young as to which be to have her . they have both be in the party that follow them , and have shoot her father , which seem to give him the good claim ; but when they argue it out in council , 's party be the strong , so the give her over to him . no one wo n't have her very long though , for i see death in her face yesterday . she be more like a ghost than a woman . be you off , then ? " " yes , i be off , " say , who have rise from his seat . his face might have be chisel out of marble , so hard and set be its expression , while its eye glow with a baleful light . " where be you go ? " " never mind , " he answer ; and , sling his weapon over his shoulder , stride off down the gorge and so away into the heart of the mountain to the haunt of the wild beast . amongst them all there be none so fierce and so dangerous as himself . the prediction of the mormon be only too well fulfill . whether it be the terrible death of her father or the effect of the hateful marriage into which she have be force , poor never hold up her head again , but pine away and die within a month . her sottish husband , who have marry her principally for the sake of 's property , do not affect any great grief at his bereavement ; but his other wife mourn over her , and sit up with her the night before the burial , as be the mormon custom . they be group round the bier in the early hour of the morning , when , to their inexpressible fear and astonishment , the door be fling open , and a , weather-beaten man in tatter garment stride into the room . without a glance or a word to the cower woman , he walk up to the white silent figure which have once contain the pure soul of . stoop over her , he press his lip reverently to her cold forehead , and then , snatch up her hand , he take the wedding-ring from her finger . " she shall not be bury in that , " he cry with a fierce snarl , and before an alarm could be raise spring down the stair and be go . so strange and so brief be the episode , that the watcher might have find it hard to believe it themselves or persuade other people of it , have it not be for the undeniable fact that the circlet of gold which mark her as have be a bride have disappear . for some month linger among the mountain , lead a strange wild life , and nursing in his heart the fierce desire for vengeance which possess him . tale be tell in the of the weird figure which be see prowl about the suburb , and which haunt the lonely mountain gorge . once a bullet whistle through 's window and flatten itself upon the wall within a foot of him . on another occasion , as pass under a cliff a great boulder crash down on him , and he only escape a terrible death by throw himself upon his face . the two young mormon be not long in discover the reason of these attempt upon their life , and lead repeated expedition into the mountain in the hope of capture or kill their enemy , but always without success . then they adopt the precaution of never go out alone or after nightfall , and of have their house guard . after a time they be able to relax these measure , for nothing be either hear or see of their opponent , and they hope that time have cool his vindictiveness . far from do so , it have , if anything , augment it . the hunter 's mind be of a hard , unyielding nature , and the predominant idea of revenge have take such complete possession of it that there be no room for any other emotion . he be , however , above all thing practical . he soon realize that even his iron constitution could not stand the incessant strain which he be put upon it . exposure and want of wholesome food be wear him out . if he die like a dog among the mountain , what be to become of his revenge then ? and yet such a death be sure to overtake him if he persist . he feel that that be to play his enemy 's game , so he reluctantly return to the old mine , there to recruit his health and to amass money enough to allow him to pursue his object without privation . his intention have be to be absent a year at the most , but a combination of unforeseen circumstance prevent his leave the mine for nearly five . at the end of that time , however , his memory of his wrong and his craving for revenge be quite as keen as on that memorable night when he have stand by 's grave . disguise , and under an assumed name , he return to , careless what become of his own life , as long as he obtain what he know to be justice . there he find evil tidings await him . there have be a schism among the a few month before , some of the young member of the church have rebel against the authority of the , and the result have be the secession of a certain number of the malcontent , who have leave and become gentile . among these have be and ; and no one know whither they have go . rumour report that have manage to convert a large part of his property into money , and that he have depart a wealthy man , while his companion , , be comparatively poor . there be no clue at all , however , as to their whereabouts . many a man , however vindictive , would have abandon all thought of revenge in the face of such a difficulty , but never falter for a moment . with the small competence he possess , eke out by such employment as he could pick up , he travel from town to town through the in quest of his enemy . year pass into year , his black hair turn grizzle , but still he wander on , a human bloodhound , with his mind wholly set upon the one object upon which he have devote his life . at last his perseverance be reward . it be but a glance of a face in a window , but that one glance tell him that in possess the man whom he be in pursuit of . he return to his miserable lodging with his plan of vengeance all arrange . it chance , however , that , look from his window , have recognize the vagrant in the street , and have read murder in his eye . he hurry before a justice of the peace , accompany by , who have become his private secretary , and represent to him that they be in danger of their life from the jealousy and hatred of an old rival . that evening be take into custody , and not be able to find surety , be detain for some week . when at last he be liberate , it be only to find that 's house be desert , and that he and his secretary have depart for . again the avenger have be foil , and again his concentrated hatred urge him to continue the pursuit . fund be want , however , and for some time he have to return to work , save every dollar for his approach journey . at last , have collect enough to keep life in him , he depart for , and track his enemy from city to city , work his way in any menial capacity , but never overtake the fugitive . when he reach they have depart for ; and when he follow them there he learn that they have just set off for . at the danish capital he be again a few day late , for they have journey on to , where he at last succeed in run them to earth . as to what occur there , we can do well than quote the old hunter 's own account , as duly record in 's , to which we be already under such obligation . our prisoner 's furious resistance do not apparently indicate any ferocity in his disposition towards ourselves , for on find himself powerless , he smile in an affable manner , and express his hope that he have not hurt any of us in the scuffle . " i guess you be go to take me to the police-station , " he remark to . " my cab be at the door . if you will loose my leg i will walk down to it . i be not so light to lift as i use to be . " and exchange glance as if they think this proposition rather a bold one ; but at once take the prisoner at his word , and loosen the towel which we have bind round his . @card@ he rise and stretch his leg , as though to assure himself that they be free once more . i remember that i think to myself , as i eye him , that i have seldom see a more powerfully build man ; and his dark sunburned face bear an expression of determination and energy which be as formidable as his personal strength . " if there be a vacant place for a chief of the police , i reckon you be the man for it , " he say , gaze with undisguised admiration at my . " the way you keep on my trail be a caution . " " you have well come with me , " say to the two detective . " i can drive you , " say . " good ! and can come inside with me . you too , , you have take an interest in the case and may as well stick to us . " i assent gladly , and we all descend together . our prisoner make no attempt at escape , but step calmly into the cab which have be his , and we follow him . mount the box , whip up the horse , and bring us in a very short time to our destination . we be usher into a small chamber where a police note down our prisoner 's name and the name of the man with whose murder he have be charge . the official be a unemotional man , who go through his duty in a dull mechanical way . " the prisoner will be put before the magistrate in the course of the week , " he say ; " in the mean time , , have you anything that you wish to say ? i must warn you that your word will be take down , and may be use against you . " " i have get a good deal to say , " our prisoner say slowly . " i want to tell you gentleman all about it . " " have n't you good reserve that for your trial ? " ask the . " i may never be try , " he answer . " you need n't look startle . it be n't suicide i be think of . be you a ? " he turn his fierce dark eye upon me as he ask this last question . " yes ; i be , " i answer . " then put your hand here , " he say , with a smile , motion with his manacle wrist towards his chest . i do so ; and become at once conscious of an extraordinary throb and commotion which be go on inside . the wall of his chest seem to thrill and quiver as a frail building would do inside when some powerful engine be at work . in the silence of the room i could hear a dull hum and buzz noise which proceed from the same source . " why , " i cry , " you have an aortic aneurism ! " " that be what they call it , " he say , placidly . " i go to a last week about it , and he tell me that it be bind to burst before many day pass . it have be get bad for year . i get it from over-exposure and among the . i have do my work now , and i do n't care how soon i go , but i should like to leave some account of the business behind me . i do n't want to be remember as a common cut-throat . " the and the two detective have a hurried discussion as to the advisability of allow him to tell his story . " do you consider , , that there be immediate danger ? " the former asked , @card@ " most certainly there be , " i answer . " in that case it be clearly our duty , in the interest of justice , to take his statement , " say the . " you be at liberty , sir , to give your account , which i again warn you will be take down . " " i will sit down , with your leave , " the prisoner say , suit the action to the word . " this aneurism of mine make me easily tired , and the tussle we have half an hour ago have not mend matter . i be on the brink of the grave , and i be not likely to lie to you . every word i say be the absolute truth , and how you use it be a matter of no consequence to me . " with these word , lean back in his chair and begin the follow remarkable statement . he speak in a calm and methodical manner , as though the event which he narrate be commonplace enough . i can vouch for the accuracy of the subjoin account , for i have have access to 's , in which the prisoner 's word be take down exactly as they be utter . " it do n't much matter to you why i hate these man , " he say ; " it be enough that they be guilty of the death of two human father and a that they have , therefore , forfeit their own life . after the lapse of time that have pass since their crime , it be impossible for me to secure a conviction against them in any court . i know of their guilt though , and i determine that i should be judge , jury , and executioner all roll into one . you will have do the same , if you have any manhood in you , if you have be in my place . " that girl that i speak of be to have marry me twenty year ago . she be force into marry that same , and break her heart over it . i take the marriage ring from her dead finger , and i vow that his die eye should rest upon that very ring , and that his last thought should be of the crime for which he be punish . i have carry it about with me , and have follow him and his accomplice over two continent until i catch them . they think to tire me out , but they could not do it . if i die , as be likely enough , i die know that my work in this world be do , and well do . they have perish , and by my hand . there be nothing leave for me to hope for , or to desire . " they be rich and i be poor , so that it be no easy matter for me to follow them . when i get to my pocket be about empty , and i find that i must turn my hand to something for my living . driving and riding be as natural to me as walking , so i apply at a 's office , and soon get employment . i be to bring a certain sum a week to the owner , and whatever be over that i might keep for myself . there be seldom much over , but i manage to scrape along somehow . the hard job be to learn my way about , for i reckon that of all the maze that ever be contrive , this city be the most confusing . i have a map beside me though , and when once i have spot the principal hotel and station , i get on pretty well . " it be some time before i find out where my two gentleman be live ; but i inquire and inquire until at last i drop across them . they be at a boarding-house at , over on the other side of the river . when once i find them out i know that i have them at my mercy . i have grow my beard , and there be no chance of their recognize me . i would dog them and follow them until i see my opportunity . i be determine that they should not escape me again . " they be very near do it for all that . go where they would about , i be always at their heel . sometimes i follow them on my cab , and sometimes on foot , but the former be the good , for then they could not get away from me . it be only early in the morning or late at night that i could earn anything , so that i begin to get behind hand with my employer . i do not mind that , however , as long as i could lay my hand upon the man i want . " they be very cunning , though . they must have think that there be some chance of their be follow , for they would never go out alone , and never after nightfall . during two week i drive behind them every day , and never once see them separate . himself be drink half the time , but be not to be catch nap . i watch them late and early , but never see the ghost of a chance ; but i be not discourage , for something tell me that the hour have almost come . my only fear be that this thing in my chest might burst a little too soon and leave my work undo . " at last , one evening i be drive up and down , as the street be call in which they board , when i see a cab drive up to their door . presently some luggage be bring out , and after a time and follow it , and drive off . i whip up my horse and keep within sight of them , feel very ill at ease , for i fear that they be go to shift their quarter . at they get out , and i leave a boy to hold my horse , and follow them on to the platform . i hear them ask for the train , and the guard answer that one have just go and there would not be another for some hour . seem to be put out at that , but be rather please than otherwise . i get so close to them in the bustle that i could hear every word that pass between them . say that he have a little business of his own to do , and that if the other would wait for him he would soon rejoin him . his companion remonstrate with him , and remind him that they have resolve to stick together . answer that the matter be a delicate one , and that he must go alone . i could not catch what say to that , but the other burst out swear , and remind him that he be nothing more than his pay servant , and that he must not presume to dictate to him . on that the give it up as a bad job , and simply bargain with him that if he miss the last train he should rejoin him at 's ; to which answer that he would be back on the platform before eleven , and make his way out of the station . " the moment for which i have wait so long have at last come . i have my enemy within my power . together they could protect each other , but singly they be at my mercy . i do not act , however , with undue precipitation . my plan be already form . there be no satisfaction in vengeance unless the offender have time to realize who it be that strike him , and why retribution have come upon him . i have my plan arrange by which i should have the opportunity of make the man who have wrong me understand that his old sin have find him out . it chance that some day before a gentleman who have be engage in look over some house in the have drop the key of one of them in my carriage . it be claim that same evening , and return ; but in the interval i have take a moulding of it , and have a duplicate construct . by mean of this i have access to at least one spot in this great city where i could rely upon be free from interruption . how to get to that house be the difficult problem which i have now to solve . " he walk down the road and go into one or two liquor shop , stay for nearly half-an-hour in the last of them . when he come out he stagger in his walk , and be evidently pretty well on . there be a hansom just in front of me , and he hail it . i follow it so close that the nose of my horse be within a yard of his driver the whole way . we rattle across and through mile of street , until , to my astonishment , we find ourselves back in the in which he have board . i could not imagine what his intention be in return there ; but i go on and pull up my cab a hundred yard or so from the house . he enter it , and his hansom drive away . give me a glass of water , if you please . my mouth get dry with the talking . " i hand him the glass , and he drink it down . " that be good , " he say . " well , i wait for a quarter of an hour , or more , when suddenly there come a noise like people struggle inside the house . next moment the door be fling open and two man appear , one of whom be , and the other be a young chap whom i have never see before . this fellow have by the collar , and when they come to the head of the step he give him a shove and a kick which send him half across the road . ' you hound , ' he cry , shake his stick at him ; ' i will teach you to insult an honest girl ! ' he be so hot that i think he would have thrash with his cudgel , only that the cur stagger away down the road as fast as his leg would carry him . he run as far as the corner , and then , see my cab , he hail me and jump in . ' me to 's , ' say he . " when i have him fairly inside my cab , my heart jump so with joy that i fear lest at this last moment my aneurism might go wrong . i drive along slowly , weigh in my own mind what it be well to do . i might take him right out into the country , and there in some desert lane have my last interview with him . i have almost decide upon this , when he solve the problem for me . the craze for drink have seize him again , and he order me to pull up outside a gin palace . he go in , leave word that i should wait for him . there he remain until close time , and when he come out he be so far go that i know the game be in my own hand . " do n't imagine that i intend to kill him in cold blood . it would only have be rigid justice if i have do so , but i could not bring myself to do it . i have long determine that he should have a show for his life if he choose to take advantage of it . among the many billet which i have fill in during my wander life , i be once janitor and sweeper out of the laboratory at . one day the professor be lecture on , @card@ and he show his student some alkaloid , as he call it , which he have extract from some south american arrow poison , and which be so powerful that the least grain mean instant death . i spot the bottle in which this preparation be keep , and when they be all go , i help myself to a little of it . i be a fairly good dispenser , so i work this alkaloid into small , soluble pill , and each pill i put in a box with a similar pill make without the poison . i determine at the time that when i have my chance , my gentleman should each have a draw out of one of these box , while i eat the pill that remain . it would be quite as deadly , and a good deal less noisy than fire across a handkerchief . from that day i have always my pill box about with me , and the time have now come when i be to use them . " it be near one than twelve , and a wild , bleak night , blow hard and rain in torrent . dismal as it be outside , i be glad glad that i could have shout out from pure exultation . if any of you gentleman have ever pine for a thing , and long for it during twenty long year , and then suddenly find it within your reach , you would understand my feeling . i light a cigar , and puff at it to steady my nerve , but my hand be tremble , and my temple throb with excitement . as i drive , i could see old and sweet look at me out of the darkness and smile at me , just as plain as i see you all in this room . all the way they be ahead of me , one on each side of the horse until i pull up at the house in the . " there be not a soul to be see , nor a sound to be hear , except the dripping of the rain . when i look in at the window , i find all huddle together in a drunken sleep . i shake him by the arm , ' it be time to get out , ' i say . " ' all right , cabby , ' say he . " i suppose he think we have come to the hotel that he have mention , for he get out without another word , and follow me down the garden . i have to walk beside him to keep him steady , for he be still a little top-heavy . when we come to the door , i open it , and lead him into the front room . i give you my word that all the way , the father and the daughter be walk in front of us . " ' it be infernally dark , ' say he , stamp about . " ' we will soon have a light , ' i say , strike a match and put it to a wax candle which i have bring with me . ' now , , ' i continue , turn to him , and hold the light to my own face , ' who be i ? ' " he gaze at me with blear , drunken eye for a moment , and then i see a horror spring up in them , and convulse his whole feature , which show me that he know me . he stagger back with a livid face , and i see the perspiration break out upon his brow , while his tooth chatter in his head . at the sight , i lean my back against the door and laugh loud and long . i have always know that vengeance would be sweet , but i have never hope for the contentment of soul which now possess me . " ' you dog ! ' i say ; ' i have hunt you from to , and you have always escape me . now , at last your wandering have come to an end , for either you or i shall never see 's sun rise . ' he shrink still further away as i speak , and i could see on his face that he think i be mad . so i be for the time . the pulse in my temple beat like sledge-hammer , and i believe i would have have a fit of some sort if the blood have not gush from my nose and relieve me . " ' what do you think of now ? ' i cry , lock the door , and shake the key in his face . ' have be slow in come , but it have overtake you at last . ' i see his coward lip tremble as i speak . he would have beg for his life , but he know well that it be useless . " ' would you murder me ? ' he stammer . " ' there be no murder , ' i answer . ' who talk of murder a mad dog ? what mercy have you upon my poor darling , when you drag her from her slaughter father , and bear her away to your accursed and shameless harem . ' " ' it be not i who kill her father , ' he cry . " ' but it be you who break her innocent heart , ' i shriek , thrust the box before him . ' let the high judge between us . choose and eat . there be death in one and life in the other . i shall take what you leave . let us see if there be justice upon the earth , or if we be rule by chance . ' " he cower away with wild cry and prayer for mercy , but i draw my knife and hold it to his throat until he have obey me . then i swallow the other , and we stand face one another in silence for a minute or more , wait to see which be to live and which be to die . shall i ever forget the look which come over his face when the first warning pang tell him that the poison be in his system ? i laugh as i see it , and hold 's marriage ring in front of his eye . it be but for a moment , for the action of the alkaloid be rapid . a spasm of pain contort his feature ; he throw his hand out in front of him , staggered , and then , with a hoarse cry , fall heavily upon the floor . i turn him over with my foot , and place my hand upon his heart . there be no movement . he be dead ! " the blood have be stream from my nose , but i have take no notice of it . i do n't know what it be that put it into my head to write upon the wall with it . perhaps it be some mischievous idea of set the police upon a wrong track , for i feel light-hearted and cheerful . i remember a german be find in with write up above him , and it be argue at the time in the newspaper that the secret society must have do it . i guess that what puzzle the would puzzle the londoner , so i dip my finger in my own blood and print it on a convenient place on the wall . then i walk down to my cab and find that there be nobody about , and that the night be still very wild . i have drive some distance when i put my hand into the pocket in which i usually keep 's ring , and find that it be not there . i be thunderstruck at this , for it be the only memento that i have of her . think that i might have drop it when i stoop over 's body , i drive back , and leave my cab in a side street , i go boldly up to the i be ready to dare anything rather than lose the ring . when i arrive there , i walk right into the arm of a police-officer who be come out , and only manage to disarm his suspicion by pretend to be hopelessly drunk . " that be how come to his end . all i have to do then be to do as much for , and so pay off 's debt . i know that he be stay at 's , and i hang about all day , but he never come out . @card@ fancy that he suspect something when fail to put in an appearance . he be cunning , be , and always on his guard . if he think he could keep me off by stay indoors he be very much mistake . i soon find out which be the window of his bedroom , and early next morning i take advantage of some ladder which be lie in the lane behind the hotel , and so make my way into his room in the grey of the dawn . i wake him up and tell him that the hour have come when he be to answer for the life he have take so long before . i describe 's death to him , and i give him the same choice of the poison pill . instead of grasp at the chance of safety which that offer him , he spring from his bed and fly at my throat . in self-defence i stab him to the heart . it would have be the same in any case , for would never have allow his guilty hand to pick out anything but the poison . " i have little more to say , and it be as well , for i be about do up . i go on it for a day or so , intend to keep at it until i could save enough to take me back to . i be stand in the yard when a ragged youngster ask if there be a cabby there call , and say that his cab be want by a gentleman at , . i go round , suspect no harm , and the next thing i know , this young man here have the bracelets on my wrist , and as neatly @card@ as ever i see in my life . that be the whole of my story , gentleman . you may consider me to be a murderer ; but i hold that i be just as much an officer of justice as you be . " so thrill have the man 's narrative be , and his manner be so impressive that we have sit silent and absorb . even the professional detective , blas as they be in every detail of crime , appear to be keenly interested in the man 's story . when he finish we sit for some minute in a stillness which be only break by the scratch of 's pencil as he give the finish touch to his shorthand account . " there be only one point on which i should like a little more information , " say at last . " who be your accomplice who come for the ring which i advertise ? " the prisoner wink at my friend jocosely . " i can tell my own secret , " he say , " but i do n't get other people into trouble . i see your advertisement , and i think it might be a plant , or it might be the ring which i want . my friend volunteer to go and see . i think you will own he do it smartly . " " not a doubt of that , " say heartily . " now , gentleman , " the remark gravely , " the form of the law must be comply with . on the prisoner will be bring before the magistrate , and your attendance will be require . until then i will be responsible for him . " he ring the bell as he speak , and be lead off by a couple of warder , while my friend and i make our way out of the and take a cab back to . we have all be warn to appear before the magistrate upon the ; but when the come there be no occasion for our testimony . a high have take the matter in hand , and have be summon before a tribunal where strict justice would be mete out to him . on the very night after his capture the aneurism burst , and he be find in the morning stretch upon the floor of the cell , with a placid smile upon his face , as though he have be able in his die moment to look back upon a useful life , and on work well do . " and will be wild about his death , " remark , as we chat it over next evening . " where will their grand advertisement be now ? " " i do n't see that they have very much to do with his capture , " i answer . " what you do in this world be a matter of no consequence , " return my companion , bitterly . " the question be , what can you make people believe that you have do . never mind , " he continue , more brightly , after a pause . " i would not have miss the investigation for anything . there have be no good case within my recollection . simple as it be , there be several most instructive point about it . " " simple ! " i ejaculate . " well , really , it can hardly be describe as otherwise , " say , smile at my surprise . " the proof of its intrinsic simplicity be , that without any help save a few very ordinary deduction i be able to lay my hand upon the criminal within three day . " " that be true , " say " i have already explain to you that what be out of the common be usually a guide rather than a hindrance . in solve a problem of this sort , the grand thing be to be able to reason backwards . that be a very useful accomplishment , and a very easy one , but people do not practise it much . in the affair of life it be more useful to reason forward , and so the other come to be neglect . there be fifty who can reason synthetically for one who can reason analytically . " " i confess , " say i , " that i do not quite follow you . " " i hardly expect that you would . let me see if i can make it clear . most people , if you describe a train of event to them , will tell you what the result would be . they can put those event together in their mind , and argue from them that something will come to pass . there be few people , however , who , if you tell them a result , would be able to evolve from their own inner consciousness what the step be which lead up to that result . this power be what i mean when i talk of reasoning backwards , or analytically . " " i understand , " say " now this be a case in which you be give the result and have to find everything else for yourself . now let me endeavour to show you the different step in my reasoning . to begin at the beginning . i approach the house , as you know , on foot , and with my mind entirely free from all impression . i naturally begin by examine the roadway , and there , as i have already explain to you , i see clearly the mark of a cab , which , i ascertain by inquiry , must have be there during the night . i satisfy myself that it be a cab and not a private carriage by the narrow gauge of the wheel . the ordinary growler be considerably less wide than a gentleman 's brougham . " this be the first point gain . i then walk slowly down the garden path , which happen to be compose of a clay soil , peculiarly suitable for take impression . no doubt it appear to you to be a mere trampled line of slush , but to my trained eye every mark upon its surface have a meaning . there be no branch of detective science which be so important and so much neglect as the art of trace footstep . happily , i have always lay great stress upon it , and much practice have make it second nature to me . i see the heavy footmark of the constable , but i see also the track of the two man who have first pass through the garden . it be easy to tell that they have be before the other , because in place their mark have be entirely obliterate by the other come upon the top of them . in this way my second link be form , which tell me that the nocturnal visitor be two in number , one remarkable for his height ( as i calculate from the length of his stride ) , and the other fashionably dress , to judge from the small and elegant impression leave by his boot . " on enter the house this last inference be confirm . my man lie before me . the tall one , then , have do the murder , if murder there be . there be no wound upon the dead man 's person , but the agitate expression upon his face assure me that he have foresee his fate before it come upon him . man who die from heart disease , or any sudden natural cause , never by any chance exhibit agitation upon their feature . have sniff the dead man 's lip i detect a slightly sour smell , and i come to the conclusion that he have have poison force upon him . again , i argue that it have be force upon him from the hatred and fear express upon his face . by the method of exclusion , i have arrive at this result , for no other hypothesis would meet the fact . do not imagine that it be a very unheard of idea . the forcible administration of poison be by no mean a new thing in criminal annals . the case of in , and of in , will occur at once to any toxicologist . " and now come the great question as to the reason why . robbery have not be the object of the murder , for nothing be take . be it politics , then , or be it a woman ? that be the question which confront me . i be incline from the first to the latter supposition . political assassin be only too glad to do their work and to fly . this murder have , on the contrary , be do most deliberately , and the perpetrator have leave his track all over the room , show that he have be there all the time . it must have be a private wrong , and not a political one , which call for such a methodical revenge . when the inscription be discover upon the wall i be more incline than ever to my opinion . the thing be too evidently a blind . when the ring be find , however , it settle the question . clearly the murderer have use it to remind his victim of some dead or absent woman . it be at this point that i ask whether he have in his telegram to as to any particular point in 's former career . he answer , you remember , in the negative . " i then proceed to make a careful examination of the room , which confirm me in my opinion as to the murderer 's height , and furnish me with the additional detail as to the cigar and the length of his nail . i have already come to the conclusion , since there be no sign of a struggle , that the blood which cover the floor have burst from the murderer 's nose in his excitement . i could perceive that the track of blood coincide with the track of his foot . it be seldom that any man , unless he be very full-blooded , break out in this way through emotion , so i hazard the opinion that the criminal be probably a robust and ruddy-faced man . event prove that i have judge correctly . " have leave the house , i proceed to do what have neglect . i telegraph to the head of the police at , limit my enquiry to the circumstance connect with the marriage of . the answer be conclusive . it tell me that have already apply for the protection of the law against an old rival in love , name , and that this same be at present in . i know now that i hold the clue to the mystery in my hand , and all that remain be to secure the murderer . " i have already determine in my own mind that the man who have walk into the house with , be none other than the man who have drive the cab . the mark in the road show me that the horse have wander on in a way which would have be impossible have there be anyone in charge of it . where , then , could the driver be , unless he be inside the house ? again , it be absurd to suppose that any sane man would carry out a deliberate crime under the very eye , as it be , of a third person , who be sure to betray him . lastly , suppose one man wish to dog another through , what well mean could he adopt than to turn cabdriver . all these consideration lead me to the irresistible conclusion that be to be find among the jarvey of the . " if he have be one there be no reason to believe that he have cease to be . on the contrary , from his point of view , any sudden change would be likely to draw attention to himself . he would , probably , for a time at least , continue to perform his duty . there be no reason to suppose that he be go under an assumed name . why should he change his name in a country where no one know his original one ? i therefore organize my arab detective corps , and send them systematically to every cab proprietor in until they ferret out the man that i want . how well they succeed , and how quickly i take advantage of it , be still fresh in your recollection . the murder of be an incident which be entirely unexpected , but which could hardly in any case have be prevent . through it , as you know , i come into possession of the pill , the existence of which i have already surmise . you see the whole thing be a chain of logical sequence without a break or flaw . " " it be wonderful ! " i cry . " your merit should be publicly recognize . you should publish an account of the case . if you wo n't , i will for you . " " you may do what you like , , " he answer . " see here ! " he continue , hand a paper over to me , " look at this ! " it be the for the day , and the paragraph to which he point be devote to the case in question . " the public , " it say , " have lose a sensational treat through the sudden death of the man , who be suspect of the murder of and of . the detail of the case will probably be never know now , though we be inform upon good authority that the crime be the result of an old standing and romantic feud , in which love and mormonism bear a part . it seem that both the victim belong , in their young day , to the , and , the deceased prisoner , hail also from . if the case have have no other effect , it , at least , bring out in the most striking manner the efficiency of our detective police force , and will serve as a lesson to all foreigner that they will do wisely to settle their feud at home , and not to carry them on to british soil . it be an open secret that the credit of this smart capture belong entirely to the well-known official , and . the man be apprehend , it appear , in the room of a certain , who have himself , as an amateur , show some talent in the detective line , and who , with such instructor , may hope in time to attain to some degree of their skill . it be expect that a testimonial of some sort will be present to the two officer as a fitting recognition of their service . " " do n't i tell you so when we start ? " cry with a laugh . " that be the result of all our study in : to get them a testimonial ! " " never mind , " i answer , " i have all the fact in my journal , and the public shall know them . in the meantime you must make yourself contented by the consciousness of success , like the -- " ' me , at in . ' "