take his bottle from the corner of the and his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case . with his long , white , nervous finger he adjust the delicate needle , and roll back his left . for some little time his eye rest thoughtfully upon the sinewy forearm and wrist all dot and scar with innumerable . finally he thrust the sharp point home , press down the tiny piston , and sink back into the with a long sigh of satisfaction . three time a day for many month i have witness this performance , but custom have not reconcile my mind to it . on the contrary , from day to day i have become more irritable at the sight , and my conscience swell nightly within me at the thought that i have lack the courage to protest . again and again i have register a vow that i should deliver my soul upon the subject , but there be that in the cool , nonchalant air of my companion which make him the last man with whom one would care to take anything approach to a liberty . his great power , his masterly manner , and the experience which i have have of his many extraordinary quality , all make me diffident and backward in cross him . yet upon that afternoon , whether it be the beaune which i have take with my lunch , or the additional exasperation produce by the extreme deliberation of his manner , i suddenly feel that i could hold out no longer . " which be it ? " i ask , -- or cocaine ? " he raise his eye languidly from the old volume which he have open . " it be cocaine , " he say , -- . solution . would you care to try it ? " " no , indeed , " i answer , brusquely . " my constitution have not get over the afghan campaign yet . i can afford to throw any extra strain upon it . " he smile at my vehemence . " perhaps you be right , , " he say . " i suppose that its influence be physically a bad one . i find it , however , so transcendently stimulate and clarify to the mind that its secondary action be a matter of small moment . " " but consider ! " i say , earnestly . " count the cost ! your brain may , as you say , be rouse and excite , but it be a pathological and morbid process , which involve increase and may at last leave a permanent weakness . you know , too , what a black reaction come upon you . surely the game be hardly worth the candle . why should you , for a mere passing pleasure , risk the loss of those great power with which you have be endow ? remember that i speak not only as one comrade to another , but as a medical man to one for whose constitution he be to some extent answerable . " he do not seem offend . on the contrary , he put his together and lean his elbow on the arm of his chair , like one who have a relish for conversation . " my mind , " he say , " rebel at stagnation . give me problem , give me work , give me the most abstruse cryptogram or the most intricate analysis , and i be in my own proper atmosphere . i can dispense then with artificial stimulant . but i abhor the dull routine of existence . i crave for mental exaltation . that be why i have choose my own particular profession , -- rather create it , for i be the only one in the world . " " the only unofficial detective ? " i say , raise my eyebrow . " the only unofficial consulting detective , " he answer . " i be the last and high court of appeal in detection . when or or be out of their , by the way , be their normal matter be lay before me . i examine the datum , as an expert , and pronounce a specialist 's opinion . i claim no credit in such case . my name figure in no newspaper . the work itself , the pleasure of find a field for my peculiar power , be my high reward . but you have yourself have some experience of my method of work in the case . " " yes , indeed , " say i , cordially . " i be never so strike by anything in my life . i even embody it in a small brochure with the somewhat fantastic title of ' a study in . ' " he shake his head sadly . " i glance over it , " say he . " honestly , i can congratulate you upon it . detection be , or ought to be , an exact science , and should be treat in the same cold and unemotional manner . you have attempt to tinge it with romanticism , which produce much the same effect as if you work a love-story or an elopement into the fifth proposition of . " " but the romance be there , " i remonstrate . " i could not tamper with the fact . " " some fact should be suppress , or at least a just sense of proportion should be observe in treat them . the only point in the case which deserve mention be the curious analytical reasoning from effect to cause by which i succeed in unravel it . " i be annoy at this criticism of a work which have be specially design to please him . i confess , too , that i be irritate by the egotism which seem to demand that every line of my pamphlet should be devote to his own special doing . more than once during the year that i have live with him in i have observe that a small vanity underlie my companion 's quiet and didactic manner . i make no remark , however , but sit nurse my wounded leg . i have a bullet through it some time before , and , though it do not prevent me from walk , it ache wearily at every change of the weather . " my practice have extend recently to the continent , " say , after a while , fill up his old pipe . " i be consult last week by , who , as you probably know , have come rather to the front lately in the french detective service . he have all the celtic power of quick intuition , but he be deficient in the wide range of exact knowledge which be essential to the high development of his art . the case be concern with a will , and possess some feature of interest . i be able to refer him to two parallel case , the one at in @card@ , and the other at in @card@ , which have suggest to him the true solution . here be the letter which i have this morning acknowledge my assistance . " he toss over , as he speak , a crumpled sheet of foreign notepaper . i glance my eye down it , catch a profusion of note of admiration , with stray " , " " , " and " , " all testify to the ardent admiration of the frenchman . " he speak as a pupil to his master , " say " oh , he rate my assistance too highly , " say , lightly . " he have considerable gift himself . he possess two out of the three quality necessary for the ideal detective . he have the power of observation and that of deduction . he be only want in knowledge ; and that may come in time . he be now translate my small work into french . " " your work ? " " oh , do n't you know ? " he cry , laugh . " yes , i have be guilty of several monograph . they be all upon technical subject . here , for example , be one ' upon the distinction between the ash of the various . ' in it i enumerate a hundred and forty form of , , and , with color plate illustrate the difference in the ash . it be a point which be continually turn up in criminal trial , and which be sometimes of supreme importance as a clue . if you can say definitely , for example , that some murder have be do by a man who be smoke an indian , it obviously narrow your field of search . to the trained eye there be as much difference between the black ash of a and the white fluff of bird's-eye as there be between a cabbage and a potato . " " you have an extraordinary genius for minutia , " i remark . " i appreciate their importance . here be my monograph upon the tracing of footstep , with some remark upon the use of plaster of as a preserver of impress . here , too , be a curious little work upon the influence of a trade upon the form of the hand , with of the hand of slater , sailor , , compositor , weaver , and . that be a matter of great practical interest to the scientific detective , -- in case of unclaimed body , or in discover the antecedent of criminal . but i weary you with my hobby . " " not at all , " i answer , earnestly . " it be of the great interest to me , especially since i have have the opportunity of observe your practical application of it . but you speak just now of observation and deduction . surely the one to some extent imply the other . " " why , hardly , " he answer , lean back luxuriously in his , and send up thick blue wreath from his pipe . " for example , observation show me that you have be to the this morning , but deduction let me know that when there you dispatch a telegram . " " right ! " say " right on both point ! but i confess that i do n't see how you arrive at it . it be a sudden impulse upon my part , and i have mention it to no one . " " it be simplicity itself , " he remark , chuckle at my surprise , -- absurdly simple that an explanation be superfluous ; and yet it may serve to define the limit of observation and of deduction . observation tell me that you have a little reddish mould adhere to your instep . just opposite the they have take up the pavement and throw up some earth which lie in such a way that it be difficult to avoid tread in it in enter . the earth be of this peculiar reddish tint which be find , as far as i know , nowhere else in the neighborhood . so much be observation . the rest be deduction . " " how , then , do you deduce the telegram ? " " why , of course i know that you have not write a letter , since i sit opposite to you all morning . i see also in your open desk there that you have a sheet of stamp and a thick bundle of . what could you go into the post-office for , then , but to send a wire ? eliminate all other factor , and the one which remain must be the truth . " " in this case it certainly be so , " i reply , after a little thought . " the thing , however , be , as you say , of the simple . would you think me impertinent if i be to put your theory to a more severe test ? " " on the contrary , " he answer , " it would prevent me from take a second dose of cocaine . i should be delight to look into any problem which you might submit to me . " " i have hear you say that it be difficult for a man to have any object in daily use without leave the impress of his individuality upon it in such a way that a trained observer might read it . now , i have here a watch which have recently come into my possession . would you have the kindness to let me have an opinion upon the character or habit of the late owner ? " i hand him over the watch with some slight feeling of amusement in my heart , for the test be , as i think , an impossible one , and i intend it as a lesson against the somewhat dogmatic tone which he occasionally assume . he balance the watch in his hand , gaze hard at the dial , open the back , and examine the work , first with his naked eye and then with a powerful convex lens . i could hardly keep from smile at his crestfallen face when he finally snap the case to and hand it back . " there be hardly any datum , " he remark . " the watch have be recently clean , which rob me of my most suggestive fact . " " you be right , " i answer . " it be clean before be send to me . " in my heart i accuse my companion of put forward a most lame and impotent excuse to cover his failure . what datum could he expect from an watch ? " though unsatisfactory , my research have not be entirely barren , " he observe , stare up at the ceiling with dreamy , lack-lustre eye . " subject to your correction , i should judge that the watch belong to your elder brother , who inherit it from your father . " " that you gather , no doubt , from the upon the back ? " " quite so . the suggest your own name . the date of the watch be nearly fifty year back , and the initial be as old as the watch : so it be make for the last generation . jewelry usually descend to the eldest son , and he be most likely to have the same name as the father . your father have , if i remember right , be dead many year . it have , therefore , be in the hand of your eldest brother . " " right , so far , " say " anything else ? " " he be a man of untidy habit , -- untidy and careless . he be leave with good prospect , but he throw away his chance , live for some time in poverty with occasional short interval of prosperity , and finally , take to drink , he die . that be all i can gather . " i spring from my chair and limp impatiently about the room with considerable bitterness in my heart . " this be unworthy of you , , " i say . " i could not have believe that you would have descend to this . you have make inquire into the history of my unhappy brother , and you now pretend to deduce this knowledge in some fanciful way . you can expect me to believe that you have read all this from his old watch ! it be unkind , and , to speak plainly , have a touch of charlatanism in it . " " my dear doctor , " say he , kindly , " pray accept my apology . view the matter as an abstract problem , i have forget how personal and painful a thing it might be to you . i assure you , however , that i never even know that you have a brother until you hand me the watch . " " then how in the name of all that be wonderful do you get these fact ? they be absolutely correct in every particular . " " ah , that be good luck . i could only say what be the balance of probability . i do not at all expect to be so accurate . " " but it be not mere guess-work ? " " no , no : i never guess . it be a shocking habit , -- to the logical faculty . what seem strange to you be only so because you do not follow my train of thought or observe the small fact upon which large inference may depend . for example , i begin by state that your brother be careless . when you observe the low part of that you notice that it be not only dint in two place , but it be cut and mark all over from the habit of keep other hard object , such as coin or key , in the same pocket . surely it be no great feat to assume that a man who treat a watch so cavalierly must be a careless man . neither be it a very far-fetched inference that a man who inherit one article of such value be pretty well provide for in other respect . " i nod , to show that i follow his reasoning . " it be very customary for pawnbroker in , when they take a watch , to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-point upon the inside of the case . it be more handy than a label , as there be no risk of the number be lose or transpose . there be no less than four such number visible to my lens on the inside of this case . inference , -- your brother be often at low water . secondary inference , -- he have occasional burst of prosperity , or he could not have redeem the pledge . finally , i ask you to look at the inner plate , which contain the . look at the thousand of scratch all round the hole , -- where the key have slip . what sober man 's key could have score those groove ? but you will never see a drunkard 's watch without them . he wind it at night , and he leave these trace of his unsteady hand . where be the mystery in all this ? " " it be as clear as daylight , " i answer . " i regret the injustice which i do you . i should have have more faith in your marvellous faculty . may i ask whether you have any professional inquiry on foot at present ? " " none . hence the cocaine . i can live without . what else be there to live for ? stand at the window here . be ever such a dreary , dismal , unprofitable world ? see how the yellow fog swirl down the street and drift across the house . what could be more hopelessly prosaic and material ? what be the use of have power , doctor , when one have no field upon which to exert them ? crime be commonplace , existence be commonplace , and no quality save those which be commonplace have any function upon earth . " i have open my mouth to reply to this tirade , when with a crisp knock our landlady enter , bear a card upon the brass salver . " a young lady for you , sir , " she say , address my companion . " , " he read . " hum ! i have no recollection of the name . ask the young lady to step up , . do n't go , doctor . i should prefer that you remain . " enter the room with a firm step and an outward composure of manner . she be a blonde young lady , small , dainty , well glove , and dress in the most perfect taste . there be , however , a plainness and simplicity about her costume which bear with it a suggestion of limited mean . the dress be a sombre grayish beige , and , and she wear a small turban of the same dull hue , relieve only by a suspicion of white feather in the side . her face have neither regularity of feature nor beauty of complexion , but her expression be sweet and amiable , and her large blue eye be singularly spiritual and sympathetic . in an experience of woman which extend over many nation and three separate continent , i have never look upon a face which give a clear promise of a refined and sensitive nature . i could not but observe that as she take the seat which place for her , her lip tremble , her hand quiver , and she show every sign of intense inward agitation . " i have come to you , , " she say , " because you once enable my employer , , to unravel a little domestic complication . she be much impress by your kindness and skill . " " , " he repeat thoughtfully . " i believe that i be of some slight service to her . the case , however , as i remember it , be a very simple one . " " she do not think so . but at least you can say the same of mine . i can hardly imagine anything more strange , more utterly inexplicable , than the situation in which i find myself . " rub his hand , and his eye glisten . he lean forward in his chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon his clear-cut , hawklike feature . " state your case , " say he , in brisk , business tone . i feel that my position be an embarrassing one . " you will , i be sure , excuse me , " i say , rise from my chair . to my surprise , the young lady hold up her glove hand to detain me . " if your friend , " she say , " would be good enough to stop , he might be of inestimable service to me . " i relapse into my chair . " briefly , " she continue , " the fact be these . my father be an officer in an indian regiment who send me home when i be quite a child . my mother be dead , and i have no relative in . i be place , however , in a comfortable boarding establishment at , and there i remain until i be seventeen year of age . in the year @card@ my father , who be senior captain of his regiment , obtain twelve month ' leave and come home . he telegraph to me from that he have arrive all safe , and direct me to come down at once , give the as his address . his message , as i remember , be full of kindness and love . on reach i drive to the , and be inform that be stay there , but that he have go out the night before and have not yet return . i wait all day without news of him . that night , on the advice of the manager of the hotel , i communicate with the police , and next morning we advertise in all the paper . our inquiry lead to no result ; and from that day to this no word have ever be hear of my unfortunate father . he come home with his heart full of hope , to find some peace , some comfort , and -- " she put her hand to her throat , and a choke sob cut short the sentence . " the date ? " ask , open his . " he disappear upon the of , @card@ , -- ten year ago . " " his luggage ? " " remain at the hotel . there be nothing in it to suggest a clue , -- clothes , some book , and a considerable number of curiosity from the . he have be one of the officer in charge of the there . " " have he any friend in town ? " " only one that we know of , -- , of his own regiment , the 34th . the major have retire some little time before , and live at . we communicate with him , of course , but he do not even know that his brother officer be in . " " a singular case , " remark . " i have not yet describe to you the most singular part . about six year be exact , upon the 4th of , advertisement appear in the ask for the address of and state that it would be to her advantage to come forward . there be no name or address append . i have at that time just enter the family of in the capacity of governess . by her advice i publish my address in the advertisement column . the same day there arrive through the post a small box address to me , which i find to contain a very large and lustrous pearl . no word of writing be enclose . since then every year upon the same date there have always appear a similar box , contain a similar pearl , without any clue as to the sender . they have be pronounce by an expert to be of a rare variety and of considerable value . you can see for that they be very handsome . " she open a flat box as she speak , and show me six of the fine pearl that i have ever see . " your statement be most interesting , " say . " have anything else occur to you ? " " yes , and no later than . that be why i have come to you . this morning i receive this letter , which you will perhaps read for yourself . " " thank you , " say . " the envelope too , please . postmark , , , 7 . hum ! man 's on corner , -- postman . good quality paper . envelope at sixpence a packet . particular man in his stationery . no address . ' at the third pillar from the left outside the at seven o'clock . if you be distrustful , bring two friend . you be a wrong woman , and shall have justice . do not bring police . if you do , all will be in vain . your unknown friend . ' well , really , this be a very pretty little mystery . what do you intend to do , ? " " that be exactly what i want to ask you . " " then we shall most certainly go . you and i , why , be the very man . your correspondent say two friend . he and i have work together before . " " but would he come ? " she ask , with something appeal in her voice and expression . " i should be proud and happy , " say i , fervently , " if i can be of any service . " " you be both very kind , " she answer . " i have lead a retire life , and have no friend whom i could appeal to . if i be here at six it will do , i suppose ? " " you must not be later , " say . " there be one other point , however . be this handwriting the same as that upon the address ? " " i have them here , " she answer , produce half a dozen piece of paper . " you be certainly a model client . you have the correct intuition . let us see , now . " he spread out the paper upon the table , and give little dart glance from one to the other . " they be disguised hand , except the letter , " he say , presently , " but there can be no question as to the authorship . see how the irrepressible greek e will break out , and see the twirl of the final they be undoubtedly by the same person . i should not like to suggest false hope , , but be there any resemblance between this hand and that of your father ? " " nothing could be more unlike . " " i expect to hear you say so . we shall look out for you , then , at six . pray allow me to keep the paper . i may look into the matter before then . it be only three . , then . " " au , " say our visitor , and , with a bright , kindly glance from one to the other of us , she replace her in her bosom and hurry away . stand at the window , i watch her walking briskly down the street , until the gray turban and white feather be but a speck in the sombre crowd . " what a very attractive woman ! " i exclaim , turn to my companion . he have light his pipe again , and be lean back with droop eyelid . " be she ? " he say , languidly . " i do not observe . " " you really be an automaton , -- ! " i cry . " there be something positively inhuman in you at time . " he smile gently . " it be of the first importance , " he say , " not to allow your judgment to be bias by personal quality . a client be to me a mere unit , -- factor in a problem . the emotional quality be antagonistic to clear reasoning . i assure you that the most winning woman i ever know be hang for poison three little child for their , and the most man of my acquaintance be a philanthropist who have spend nearly a quarter of a million upon the poor . " " in this case , -- " " i never make exception . an exception disprove the rule . have you ever have occasion to study character in handwriting ? what do you make of this fellow 's scribble ? " " it be legible and regular , " i answer . " a man of business habit and some force of character . " shake his head . " look at his long letter , " he say . " they hardly rise above the common herd . that d might be an a , and that l an e. men of character always differentiate their long letter , however illegibly they may write . there be vacillation in his k 's and self-esteem in his capital . i be go out now . i have some few reference to make . let me recommend this book , -- of the most remarkable ever pen . it be 's ' martyrdom of man . ' i shall be back in an hour . " i sit in the window with the volume in my hand , but my thought be far from the daring speculation of the writer . my mind run upon our late visitor , -- smile , the deep rich tone of her voice , the strange mystery which overhang her life . if she be seventeen at the time of her father 's disappearance she must be now , -- sweet age , when youth have lose its self-consciousness and become a little sober by experience . so i sit and muse , until such dangerous thought come into my head that i hurry away to my desk and plunge furiously into the late treatise upon pathology . what be i , an army surgeon with a weak leg and a weak , that i should dare to think of such thing ? she be a unit , a factor , -- more . if my future be black , it be well surely to face it like a man than to attempt to brighten it by mere will-o'-the-wisp of the imagination . it be five before return . he be bright , eager , and in excellent spirit , -- mood which in his case alternate with fit of the black depression . " there be no great mystery in this matter , " he say , take the cup of tea which i have pour out for him . " the fact appear to admit of only one explanation . " " what ! you have solve it already ? " " well , that would be too much to say . i have discover a suggestive fact , that be all . it be , however , suggestive . the detail be still to be add . i have just find , on consult the back file of the , that , of , late of the 34th , die upon the 28th of , @card@ . " " i may be very obtuse , , but i fail to see what this suggest . " " no ? you surprise me . look at it in this way , then . disappear . the only person in whom he could have visit be . deny have hear that he be in . four year late die . within a of 's daughter receive a valuable present , which be repeat from year to year , and now culminate in a letter which describe her as a wrong woman . what wrong can it refer to except this deprivation of her father ? and why should the present begin immediately after 's death , unless it be that 's heir know something of the mystery and desire to make compensation ? have you any alternative theory which will meet the fact ? " " but what a strange compensation ! and how strangely make ! why , too , should he write a letter now , rather than six year ago ? again , the letter speak of give her justice . what justice can she have ? it be too much to suppose that her father be still alive . there be no other injustice in her case that you know of . " " there be difficulty ; there be certainly difficulty , " say , pensively . " but our expedition of will solve them all . ah , here be a four-wheeler , and be inside . be you all ready ? then we have well go down , for it be a little past the hour . " i pick up my hat and my heavy stick , but i observe that take his revolver from his drawer and slip it into his pocket . it be clear that he think that our night 's work might be a serious one . be muffle in a dark cloak , and her sensitive face be compose , but pale . she must have be more than woman if she do not feel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we be embark , yet her self-control be perfect , and she readily answer the few additional question which put to her . " be a very particular friend of papa be , " she say . " his letter be full of allusion to the major . he and papa be in command of the troop at the , so they be throw a great deal together . by the way , a curious paper be find in papa 's desk which no one could understand . i do n't suppose that it be of the slight importance , but i think you might care to see it , so i bring it with me . it be here . " unfold the paper carefully and smooth it out upon his knee . he then very methodically examine it all over with his double lens . " it be paper of native indian manufacture , " he remark . " it have at some time be pin to a board . the diagram upon it appear to be a plan of part of a large building with numerous hall , corridor , and passage . at one point be a small cross do in red ink , and above it be ' @card@ from leave , ' in fade . in the left-hand corner be a curious hieroglyphic like four crosse in a line with their arm touching . beside it be write , in very rough and coarse character , ' the sign of the four , -- , , , . ' no , i confess that i do not see how this bear upon the matter . yet it be evidently a document of importance . it have be keep carefully in a pocket-book ; for the one side be as clean as the other . " " it be in his pocket-book that we find it . " " preserve it carefully , then , , for it may prove to be of use to us . i begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to be much deep and more subtle than i at first suppose . i must reconsider my idea . " he lean back in the cab , and i could see by his draw brow and his vacant eye that he be think intently . and i chat in an undertone about our present expedition and its possible outcome , but our companion maintain his impenetrable reserve until the end of our journey . it be a evening , and not yet seven o'clock , but the day have be a dreary one , and a dense drizzly fog lie low upon the great city . mud-colored cloud droop sadly over the muddy street . down the the lamp be but misty splotch of diffuse light which throw a feeble circular glimmer upon the slimy pavement . the yellow glare from the stream out into the steamy , vaporous air , and throw a murky , shift radiance across the crowded thoroughfare . there be , to my mind , something eerie and in the endless procession of face which flit across these narrow bar of light , -- face and glad , haggard and merry . like all human kind , they flit from the gloom into the light , and so back into the gloom once more . i be not subject to impression , but the dull , heavy evening , with the strange business upon which we be engage , combine to make me nervous and depressed . i could see from 's manner that she be suffer from the same feeling . alone could rise superior to petty influence . he hold his open upon his knee , and from time to time he jot down figure and memorandum in the light of his . at the the crowd be already thick at the . in front a continuous stream of hansom and four-wheeler be rattle up , discharge their cargo of man and , woman . we have hardly reach the third pillar , which be our rendezvous , before a small , dark , brisk man in the dress of a coachman accost us . " be you the party who come with ? " he ask . " i be , and these two gentleman be my friend , " say she . he bend a pair of wonderfully penetrate and question eye upon us . " you will excuse me , miss , " he say with a certain dogged manner , " but i be to ask you to give me your word that neither of your companion be a police-officer . " " i give you my word on that , " she answer . he give a shrill whistle , on which a street arab lead across a four-wheeler and open the door . the man who have address us mount to the box , while we take our place inside . we have hardly do so before the driver whip up his horse , and we plunge away at a furious pace through the foggy street . the situation be a curious one . we be drive to an unknown place , on an unknown errand . yet our invitation be either a complete hoax , -- be an inconceivable hypothesis , -- else we have good reason to think that important issue might hang upon our journey . 's demeanor be as resolute and collect as ever . i endeavor to cheer and amuse her by reminiscence of my adventure in ; but , to tell the truth , i be myself so excited at our situation and so curious as to our destination that my storey be slightly involve . to this day she declare that i tell her one move anecdote as to how a musket look into my tent at the dead of night , and how i fire a double-barrelled tiger cub at it . at first i have some idea as to the direction in which we be drive ; but soon , what with our pace , the fog , and my own limited knowledge of , i lose my bearing , and know nothing , save that we seem to be go a very long way . be never at fault , however , and he mutter the name as the cab rattle through square and in and out by tortuous . " , " say he . " now . now we come out on the . we be make for the side , apparently . yes , i think so . now we be on the bridge . you can catch glimpse of the river . " we do indeed get a fleeting view of a stretch of the with the lamp shine upon the broad , silent water ; but our cab dash on , and be soon involve in a labyrinth of street upon the other side . " , " say my companion . " priory . . . . . our quest do not appear to take us to very fashionable region . " we have , indeed , reach a questionable and forbidding neighborhood . long line of dull brick house be only relieve by the coarse glare and tawdry brilliancy of public house at the corner . then come row of villa each with a front of miniature garden , and then again interminable line of new stare brick building , -- monster tentacle which the giant city be throw out into the country . at last the cab draw up at the third house in a new terrace . none of the other house be inhabit , and that at which we stop be as dark as its neighbor , save for a single glimmer in the kitchen window . on our knock , however , the door be instantly throw open by a hindoo servant clad in a yellow turban , white loose-fitting clothes , and a yellow sash . there be something strangely incongruous in this oriental figure frame in the commonplace of a third-rate suburban dwelling-house . " the await you , " say he , and even as he speak there come a high piping voice from some inner room . " show them in to me , , " it cry . " show them straight in to me . " we follow the indian down a sordid and common passage , ill light and worse furnished , until he come to a door upon the right , which he throw open . a blaze of yellow light stream out upon us , and in the centre of the glare there stand a small man with a very high head , a bristle of red hair all round the fringe of it , and a bald , shine scalp which shoot out from among it like a from . he writhe his hand together as he stand , and his feature be in a perpetual jerk , now smile , now scowl , but never for an instant in repose . have give him a pendulous lip , and a too visible line of yellow and irregular tooth , which he strive feebly to conceal by constantly pass his hand over the low part of his face . in spite of his obtrusive baldness , he give the impression of youth . in point of fact he have just turn his thirtieth year . " your servant , , " he keep repeat , in a thin , high voice . " your servant , gentleman . step into my little sanctum . a small place , miss , but furnish to my own liking . an oasis of art in the howl desert of . " we be all astonish by the appearance of the apartment into which he invite us . in that sorry house it look as out of place as a diamond of the first water in a setting of brass . the rich and glossy of curtain and tapestry drape the wall , loop back here and there to expose some painting or oriental vase . the carpet be of , so soft and so thick that the foot sink pleasantly into it , as into a bed of moss . two great throw athwart it increase the suggestion of eastern luxury , as do a huge hookah which stand upon a mat in the corner . a lamp in the fashion of a silver dive be hang from an almost invisible golden wire in the centre of the room . as it burn it fill the air with a subtle and aromatic odor . " , " say the little man , still jerk and smile . " that be my name . you be , of course . and these -- " " this be , and this be . " " a doctor , ? " cry he , much excite . " have you your stethoscope ? might i ask you have the kindness ? i have grave doubt as to my mitral valve , if you would be so very good . the aortic i may rely upon , but i should value your opinion upon the mitral . " i listen to his heart , as request , but be unable to find anything amiss , save indeed that he be in an ecstasy of fear , for he shiver from head to foot . " it appear to be normal , " i say . " you have no cause for uneasiness . " " you will excuse my anxiety , , " he remark , airily . " i be a great sufferer , and i have long have suspicion as to that valve . i be delight to hear that they be unwarranted . have your father , , refrain from throw a strain upon his heart , he might have be alive now . " i could have strike the man across the face , so hot be i at this callous and off-hand reference to so delicate a matter . sit down , and her face grow white to the lip . " i know in my heart that he be dead , " say she . " i can give you every information , " say he , " and , what be more , i can do you justice ; and i will , too , whatever may say . i be so glad to have your friend here , not only as an escort to you , but also as witness to what i be about to do and say . the three of us can show a bold front to . but let us have no outsider , -- police or official . we can settle everything satisfactorily among ourselves , without any interference . nothing would annoy more than any publicity . " he sit down upon a low settee and blink at us inquiringly with his weak , watery blue eye . " for my part , " say , " whatever you may choose to say will go no further . " i nod to show my agreement . " that be well ! that be well ! " say he . " may i offer you a glass of chianti , ? or of ? i keep no other wine . shall i open a flask ? no ? well , then , i trust that you have no objection to , to the mild balsamic odor of the eastern tobacco . i be a little nervous , and i find my hookah an invaluable sedative . " he apply a taper to the great bowl , and the smoke bubble merrily through the rose-water . we sit all three in a semicircle , with our head advance , and our chin upon our hand , while the strange , jerky little fellow , with his high , shine head , puff uneasily in the centre . " when i first determine to make this communication to you , " say he , " i might have give you my address , but i fear that you might disregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you . i take the liberty , therefore , of make an appointment in such a way that my man might be able to see you first . i have complete confidence in his discretion , and he have order , if he be dissatisfy , to proceed no further in the matter . you will excuse these precaution , but i be a man of somewhat retire , and i might even say refine , taste , and there be nothing more than a policeman . i have a natural shrinking from all form of rough materialism . i seldom come in contact with the rough crowd . i live , as you see , with some little atmosphere of elegance around me . i may call myself a patron of the art . it be my weakness . the landscape be a genuine , and , though a connoisseur might perhaps throw a doubt upon that , there can be the least question about the . i be partial to the modern french school . " " you will excuse me , , " say , " but i be here at your request to learn something which you desire to tell me . it be very late , and i should desire the interview to be as short as possible . " " at the good it must take some time , " he answer ; " for we shall certainly have to go to and see . we shall all go and try if we can get the good of . he be very angry with me for take the course which have seem right to me . i have quite high word with him last night . you can imagine what a terrible fellow he be when he be angry . " " if we be to go to it would perhaps be as well to start at once , " i venture to remark . he laugh until his ear be quite red . " that would hardly do , " he cry . " i do n't know what he would say if i bring you in that sudden way . no , i must prepare you by show you how we all stand to each other . in the first place , i must tell you that there be several point in the story of which i be myself ignorant . i can only lay the fact before you as far as i know them myself . " my father be , as you may have guess , , once of the indian army . he retire some eleven year ago , and come to live at in . he have prosper in , and bring back with him a considerable sum of money , a large collection of valuable curiosity , and a staff of native servant . with these advantage he buy himself a house , and live in great luxury . my and i be the only child . " i very well remember the sensation which be cause by the disappearance of . we read the detail in the paper , and , know that he have be a friend of our father be , we discuss the case freely in his presence . he use to join in our speculation as to what could have happen . never for an instant do we suspect that he have the whole secret hide in his own breast , -- of all man he alone know the fate of . " we do know , however , that some positive our father . he be very fearful of go out alone , and he always employ two to act as porter at . , who drive you , be one of them . he be once light-weight champion of . our father would never tell us what it be he fear , but he have a most marked aversion to man with wooden leg . on one occasion he actually fire his revolver at a man , who prove to be a harmless tradesman canvass for order . we have to pay a large sum to hush the matter up . my brother and i use to think this a mere whim of my father be , but event have since lead us to change our opinion . " early in @card@ my father receive a letter from which be a great shock to him . he nearly faint at the when he open it , and from that day he sicken to his death . what be in the letter we could never discover , but i could see as he hold it that it be short and write in a scrawl hand . he have suffer for year from an enlarged spleen , but he now become rapidly bad , and towards the end of we be inform that he be beyond all hope , and that he wish to make a last communication to us . " when we enter his room he be prop up with pillow and breathe heavily . he beseech us to lock the door and to come upon either side of the bed . then , grasp our hand , he make a remarkable statement to us , in a voice which be break as much by emotion as by pain . i shall try and give it to you in his own very word . " ' i have only one thing , ' he say , ' which weigh upon my mind at this supreme moment . it be my treatment of poor 's orphan . the cursed greed which have be my besetting sin through life have withhold from her the treasure , half at least of which should have be hers . and yet i have make no use of it myself , -- blind and foolish a thing be avarice . the mere feeling of possession have be so dear to me that i could not bear to share it with another . see that chaplet dip with pearl beside the . even that i could not bear to part with , although i have get it out with the design of send it to her . you , my son , will give her a fair share of the treasure . but send her even the i be go . after all , man have be as bad as this and have recover . " ' i will tell you how die , ' he continue . ' he have suffer for year from a weak heart , but he conceal it from every one . i alone know it . when in , he and i , through a remarkable chain of circumstance , come into possession of a considerable treasure . i bring it over to , and on the night of 's arrival he come straight over here to claim his share . he walk over from the station , and be admit by my faithful , who be now dead . and i have a difference of opinion as to the division of the treasure , and we come to heated word . have spring out of his chair in a paroxysm of anger , when he suddenly press his hand to his side , his face turn a dusky hue , and he fall backwards , cut his head against the corner of the . when i stoop over him i find , to my horror , that he be dead . " ' for a long time i sit half distract , wonder what i should do . my first impulse be , of course , to call for assistance ; but i could not but recognize that there be every chance that i would be accuse of his murder . his death at the moment of a quarrel , and the gash in his head , would be black against me . again , an official inquiry could not be make without bring out some fact about the treasure , which i be particularly anxious to keep secret . he have tell me that no soul upon earth know where he have go . there seem to be no necessity why any soul ever should know . " ' i be still ponder over the matter , when , look up , i see my servant , , in the doorway . he steal in and bolt the door behind him . " do not fear , , " he say . " no one need know that you have kill him . let us hide him away , and who be the wise ? " " i do not kill him , " say shake his head and smile . " i hear it all , , " say he . " i hear you quarrel , and i hear the blow . but my lip be seal . all be asleep in the house . let us put him away together . " that be enough to decide me . if my own servant could not believe my innocence , how could i hope to make it good before twelve foolish tradesman in a jury-box ? and i dispose of the body that night , and within a few day the paper be full of the mysterious disappearance of . you will see from what i say that i can hardly be blame in the matter . my fault lie in the fact that we conceal not only the body , but also the treasure , and that i have cling to 's share as well as to my own . i wish you , therefore , to make restitution . put your ear down to my mouth . the treasure be hidden -- ' at this instant a horrible change come over his expression ; his eye stare wildly , his jaw drop , and he yell , in a voice which i can never forget , ' keep him out ! for 's sake keep him out ! ' we both stare round at the window behind us upon which his gaze be fix . a face be look in at us out of the darkness . we could see the whitening of the nose where it be press against the glass . it be a bearded , hairy face , with wild cruel eye and an expression of concentrated malevolence . my brother and i rush towards the window , but the man be go . when we return to my father his head have drop and his pulse have cease to beat . " we search the garden that night , but find no sign of the intruder , save that just under the window a single footmark be visible in the . but for that one trace , we might have think that our imagination have conjure up that wild , fierce face . we soon , however , have another and a more striking proof that there be secret agency at work all round us . the window of my father 's room be find open in the morning , his cupboard and box have be rifle , and upon his chest be fix a torn piece of paper , with the word ' the sign of the four ' scrawl across it . what the phrase mean , or who our secret visitor may have be , we never know . as far as we can judge , none of my father 's property have be actually steal , though everything have be turn out . my brother and i naturally associate this peculiar incident with the fear which haunt my father during his life ; but it be still a complete mystery to us . " the little man stop to his hookah and puff thoughtfully for a few moment . we have all sit absorb , listen to his extraordinary narrative . at the short account of her father 's death have turn deadly white , and for a moment i fear that she be about to faint . she rally however , on drink a glass of water which i quietly pour out for her from a venetian carafe upon the . lean back in his chair with an abstracted expression and the lid draw low over his glitter eye . as i glance at him i could not but think how on that very day he have complain bitterly of the commonplaceness of life . here at least be a problem which would tax his sagacity to the utmost . look from one to the other of us with an obvious pride at the effect which his story have produce , and then continue between the puff of his overgrow pipe . " my brother and i , " say he , " be , as you may imagine , much excite as to the treasure which my father have speak of . for week and for month we dig and delve in every part of the garden , without discover its whereabouts . it be madden to think that the hiding-place be on his very lip at the moment that he die . we could judge the splendor of the missing riches by the chaplet which he have take out . over this chaplet my brother and i have some little discussion . the pearl be evidently of great value , and he be averse to part with them , for , between friend , my brother be himself a little incline to my father 's fault . he think , too , that if we part with the chaplet it might give rise to gossip and finally bring us into trouble . it be all that i could do to persuade him to let me find out 's address and send her a detached pearl at fix interval , so that at least she might never feel destitute . " " it be a kindly think , " say our companion , earnestly . " it be extremely good of you . " the little man wave his hand deprecatingly . " we be your trustee , " he say . " that be the view which i take of it , though could not altogether see it in that light . we have plenty of money ourselves . i desire no more . besides , it would have be such bad taste to have treat a young lady in so scurvy a fashion . ' gout au crime . ' the have a very neat way of put these thing . our difference of opinion on this subject go so far that i think it well to set up room for myself : so i leave , take the old and with me . yesterday , however , i learn that an event of extreme importance have occur . the treasure have be discover . i instantly communicate with , and it only remain for us to drive out to and demand our share . i explain my view last night to : so we shall be expect , if not welcome , visitor . " cease , and sit twitch on his luxurious settee . we all remain silent , with our thought upon the new development which the mysterious business have take . be the first to spring to his foot . " you have do well , sir , from first to last , " say he . " it be possible that we may be able to make you some small return by throw some light upon that which be still dark to you . but , as remark just now , it be late , and we have well put the matter through without delay . " our new acquaintance very deliberately coil up the tube of his hookah , and produce from behind a curtain a very long topcoat with collar and cuff . this he button tightly up , in spite of the extreme closeness of the night , and finish his attire by put on a cap with hang lappet which cover the ear , so that no part of him be visible save his mobile and peaky face . " my health be somewhat fragile , " he remark , as he lead the way down the passage . " i be compel to be a valetudinarian . " our cab be await us outside , and our programme be evidently prearrange , for the driver start off at once at a rapid pace . talk incessantly , in a voice which rise high above the rattle of the wheel . " be a clever fellow , " say he . " how do you think he find out where the treasure be ? he have come to the conclusion that it be somewhere indoors : so he work out all the cubic space of the house , and make measurement everywhere , so that not one inch should be unaccounted for . among other thing , he find that the height of the building be foot , but on add together the height of all the separate room , and make every allowance for the space between , which he ascertain by boring , he could not bring the total to more than seventy foot . there be four foot unaccounted for . these could only be at the top of the building . he knock a hole , therefore , in the ceiling of the high room , and there , sure enough , he come upon another little garret above it , which have be seal up and be know to no one . in the centre stand the , rest upon two rafter . he lower it through the hole , and there it lie . he compute the value of the jewel at not less than half a million sterling . " at the mention of this gigantic sum we all stare at one another open-eyed . , could we secure her right , would change from a needy governess to the rich heiress in . surely it be the place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news ; yet i be ashamed to say that selfishness take me by the soul , and that my heart turn as heavy as lead within me . i stammer out some few halting word of congratulation , and then sit downcast , with my head droop , deaf to the babble of our new acquaintance . he be clearly a confirm hypochondriac , and i be dreamily conscious that he be pour forth interminable train of symptom , and implore information as to the composition and action of innumerable quack nostrum , some of which he bear about in a leather case in his pocket . i trust that he may not remember any of the answer which i give him that night . declare that he overhear me caution him against the great danger of take more than two drop of castor oil , while i recommend strychnine in large dose as a sedative . however that may be , i be certainly relieve when our cab pull up with a jerk and the coachman spring down to open the door . " this , , be , " say , as he hand her out . it be nearly eleven o'clock when we reach this final stage of our night 's adventure . we have leave the damp fog of the great city behind us , and the night be fairly fine . a warm wind blow from the westward , and heavy cloud move slowly across the sky , with half a moon peep occasionally through the rift . it be clear enough to see for some distance , but take down one of the from the carriage to give us a good light upon our way . stand in its own ground , and be gird round with a very high stone wall top with break glass . a single narrow door form the only means of entrance . on this our guide knock with a peculiar rat-tat . " who be there ? " cry a gruff voice from within . " it be i , . you surely know my knock by this time . " there be a grumble sound and a clank and jar of key . the door swing heavily back , and a short , man stand in the opening , with the yellow light of the lantern shine upon his protrude face and twinkle distrustful eye . " that you , ? but who be the other ? i have no order about them from the master . " " no , ? you surprise me ! i tell my brother last night that i should bring some friend . " " he ai n't be out o ' his room , , and i have no order . you know very well that i must stick to regulation . i can let you in , but your friend must just stop where they be . " this be an unexpected obstacle . look about him in a perplex and helpless manner . " this be too bad of you , ! " he say . " if i guarantee them , that be enough for you . there be the young lady , too . she can wait on the public road at this hour . " " very sorry , , " say the porter , inexorably . " folk may be friend o ' yours , and yet no friend o ' the master 's . he pay me well to do my duty , and my duty i will do . i do n't know none o ' your friend . " " oh , yes you do , , " cry , genially . " i do n't think you can have forget me . do n't you remember the amateur who fight three round with you at 's room on the night of your benefit four year back ? " " not ! " roar the . " 's truth ! how could i have mistake you ? if instead o ' standin ' there so quiet you have just step up and give me that of yours under the jaw , i have ' know you without a question . ah , you be one that have waste your gift , you have ! you might have aim high , if you have join the fancy . " " you see , , if all else fail me i have still one of the scientific profession open to me , " say , laugh . " our friend wo n't keep us out in the cold now , i be sure . " " in you come , sir , in you come , -- and your friend , " he answer . " very sorry , , but order be very strict . have to be certain of your friend before i let them in . " inside , a gravel path wind through desolate ground to a huge clump of a house , square and prosaic , all plunge in shadow save where a moonbeam strike one corner and glimmer in a garret window . the vast size of the building , with its gloom and its deathly silence , strike a chill to the heart . even seem ill at ease , and the lantern quiver and rattle in his hand . " i can understand it , " he say . " there must be some mistake . i distinctly tell that we should be here , and yet there be no light in his window . i do not know what to make of it . " " do he always guard the premise in this way ? " ask . " yes ; he have follow my father 's custom . he be the favorite son , you know , and i sometimes think that my father may have tell him more than he ever tell me . that be 's window up there where the moonshine strike . it be quite bright , but there be no light from within , i think . " " none , " say . " but i see the glint of a light in that little window beside the door . " " ah , that be the housekeeper 's room . that be where old sit . she can tell us all about it . but perhaps you would not mind wait here for a minute or two , for if we all go in together and she have no word of our come she may be alarm . but hush ! what be that ? " he hold up the lantern , and his hand shake until the circle of light flicker and waver all round us . seize my wrist , and we all stand with thumping heart , strain our ear . from the great black house there sound through the silent night the sad and most pitiful of sound , -- shrill , break whimpering of a frightened woman . " it be , " say . " she be the only woman in the house . wait here . i shall be back in a moment . " he hurry for the door , and knock in his peculiar way . we could see a tall old woman admit him , and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him . " oh , , sir , i be so glad you have come ! i be so glad you have come , , sir ! " we hear her reiterate until the door be close and her voice die away into a muffle monotone . our guide have leave us the lantern . swing it slowly round , and peer keenly at the house , and at the great which cumber the ground . and i stand together , and her hand be in mine . a wondrous subtle thing be love , for here be we two who have never see each other before that day , between whom no word or even look of affection have ever pass , and yet now in an hour of trouble our hand instinctively seek for each other . i have marvel at it since , but at the time it seem the most natural thing that i should go out to her so , and , as she have often tell me , there be in her also the instinct to turn to me for comfort and protection . so we stand hand in hand , like two child , and there be peace in our heart for all the dark thing that surround us . " what a strange place ! " she say , look round . " it look as though all the mole in have be let loose in it . i have see something of the sort on the side of a hill near , where the prospector have be at work . " " and from the same cause , " say . " these be the trace of the . you must remember that they be six year look for it . no wonder that the ground look like a . " at that moment the door of the house burst open , and come run out , with his hand throw forward and terror in his eye . " there be something amiss with ! " he cry . " i be frighten ! my nerve can stand it . " he be , indeed , half blubber with fear , and his twitch feeble face peep out from the great collar have the helpless appealing expression of a terrify child . " come into the house , " say , in his crisp , firm way . " yes , do ! " plead . " i really do not feel equal to give direction . " we all follow him into the housekeeper 's room , which stand upon the left-hand side of the passage . the old woman be pace up and down with a scared look and restless pick finger , but the sight of appear to have a soothing effect upon her . " bless your sweet calm face ! " she cry , with an hysterical sob . " it do me good to see you . oh , but i have be sorely try this day ! " our companion pat her thin , hand , and murmur some few word of kindly womanly comfort which bring the color back into the other bloodless cheek . " master have lock himself in and will not answer me , " she explain . " all day i have wait to hear from him , for he often like to be alone ; but an hour ago i fear that something be amiss , so i go up and peep through the . you must go up , , -- must go up and look for yourself . i have see in joy and in sorrow for ten long year , but i never see him with such a face on him as that . " take the lamp and lead the way , for 's tooth be chatter in his head . so shake be he that i have to pass my hand under his arm as we go up the stair , for his knee be tremble under him . twice as we ascend whip his lens out of his pocket and carefully examine mark which appear to me to be mere shapeless smudge of dust upon the matting which serve as a stair-carpet . he walk slowly from step to step , hold the lamp , and shoot keen glance to right and leave . have remain behind with the frightened housekeeper . the third flight of stair end in a straight passage of some length , with a great picture in indian tapestry upon the right of it and three door upon the left . advance along it in the same slow and methodical way , while we keep close at his heel , with our long black shadow stream backwards down the corridor . the third door be that which we be seek . knock without receive any answer , and then try to turn the handle and force it open . it be lock on the inside , however , and by a broad and powerful bolt , as we could see when we set our lamp up against it . the key be turn , however , the hole be not entirely close . bend down to it , and instantly rise again with a sharp of the breath . " there be something devilish in this , , " say he , more move than i have ever before see him . " what do you make of it ? " i stoop to the hole , and recoil in horror . moonlight be stream into the room , and it be bright with a vague and shifty radiance . look straight at me , and suspend , as it be , in the air , for all beneath be in shadow , there hang a face , -- very face of our companion . there be the same high , shine head , the same circular bristle of red hair , the same bloodless countenance . the feature be set , however , in a horrible smile , a fix and unnatural grin , which in that still and moonlit room be more jarring to the nerve than any scowl or contortion . so like be the face to that of our little friend that i look round at him to make sure that he be indeed with us . then i recall to mind that he have mention to us that his brother and he be twin . " this be terrible ! " i say to . " what be to be do ? " " the door must come down , " he answer , and , spring against it , he put all his weight upon the lock . it creak and groan , but do not yield . together we fling ourselves upon it once more , and this time it give way with a sudden snap , and we find ourselves within 's chamber . it appear to have be fit up as a chemical laboratory . a double line of bottle be draw up upon the wall opposite the door , and the table be litter over with bunsen burner , test-tube , and retort . in the corner stand carboy of acid in wicker basket . one of these appear to leak or to have be break , for a stream of liquid have trickle out from it , and the air be heavy with a peculiarly pungent , tar-like odor . a set of step stand at one side of the room , in the midst of a litter of lath and plaster , and above them there be an opening in the ceiling large enough for a man to pass through . at the foot of the step a long coil of rope be throw carelessly together . by the table , in a wooden , the master of the house be seat all in a heap , with his head sink upon his left shoulder , and that ghastly , inscrutable smile upon his face . he be stiff and cold , and have clearly be dead many hour . it seem to me that not only his feature but all his limb be twist and turn in the most fantastic fashion . by his hand upon the table there lie a peculiar instrument , -- brown , close-grained stick , with a stone head like a hammer , rudely lash on with coarse twine . beside it be a torn sheet of with some word scrawl upon it . glance at it , and then hand it to me . " you see , " he say , with a significant raising of the eyebrow . in the light of the lantern i read , with a thrill of horror , " the sign of the four . " " in 's name , what do it all mean ? " i ask . " it mean murder , " say he , stoop over the dead man . " ah , i expect it . look here ! " he point to what look like a long , dark thorn stick in the skin just above the ear . " it look like a thorn , " say " it be a thorn . you may pick it out . but be careful , for it be poison . " i take it up between my finger and thumb . it come away from the skin so readily that hardly any mark be leave behind . one tiny speck of blood show where the puncture have be . " this be all an insoluble mystery to me , " say " it grow dark instead of clearer . " " on the contrary , " he answer , " it clear every instant . i only require a few missing link to have an entirely connect case . " we have almost forget our companion 's presence since we enter the chamber . he be still stand in the , the very picture of terror , wring his hand and moan to himself . suddenly , however , he break out into a sharp , querulous cry . " the treasure be go ! " he say . " they have rob him of the treasure ! there be the hole through which we lower it . i help him to do it ! i be the last person who see him ! i leave him here last night , and i hear him lock the door as i come . " " what time be that ? " " it be ten o'clock . and now he be dead , and the police will be call in , and i shall be suspect of have have a hand in it . oh , yes , i be sure i shall . but you do n't think so , gentleman ? surely you do n't think that it be i ? be it likely that i would have bring you here if it be i ? oh , dear ! oh , dear ! i know that i shall go mad ! " he jerk his arm and stamp his foot in a kind of convulsive frenzy . " you have no reason for fear , , " say , kindly , put his hand upon his shoulder . " take my advice , and drive down to the station to report this matter to the police . offer to assist them in every way . we shall wait here until your return . " the little man obey in a fashion , and we hear him stumble down the stair in the dark . " now , , " say , rub his hand , " we have half an hour to ourselves . let us make good use of it . my case be , as i have tell you , almost complete ; but we must not err on the side of over-confidence . simple as the case seem now , there may be something deeper underlie it . " " simple ! " i ejaculate . " surely , " say he , with something of the air of a clinical professor expound to his class . " just sit in the corner there , that your footprint may not complicate matter . now to work ! in the first place , how do these folk come , and how do they go ? the door have not be open since last night . how of the window ? " he carry the lamp across to it , mutter his observation aloud the while , but address them to himself rather than to me . " window be on the inner side . framework be solid . no hinge at the side . let us open it . no near . quite out of reach . yet a man have mount by the window . it rain a little last night . here be the print of a foot in mould upon the sill . and here be a circular muddy mark , and here again upon the floor , and here again by the table . see here , ! this be really a very pretty demonstration . " i look at the round , well-defined muddy disc . " this be not a footmark , " say " it be something much more valuable to us . it be the impression of a wooden stump . you see here on the sill be the , a heavy boot with the broad metal heel , and beside it be the mark of the . " " it be the man . " " quite so . but there have be some one else , -- very able and efficient ally . could you scale that wall , doctor ? " i look out of the open window . the moon still shine brightly on that angle of the house . we be a good sixty foot from the ground , and , look where i would , i could see no foothold , nor as much as a crevice in the . " it be absolutely impossible , " i answer . " without aid it be so . but suppose you have a friend up here who lower you this good stout rope which i see in the corner , secure one end of it to this great hook in the wall . then , i think , if you be an active man , you might swarm up , wooden leg and all . you would depart , of course , in the same fashion , and your ally would draw up the rope , untie it from the hook , shut the window , snib it on the inside , and get away in the way that he originally come . as a minor point it may be note , " he continue , finger the rope , " that our friend , though a fair climber , be not a professional sailor . his hand be far from horny . my lens disclose more than one , especially towards the end of the rope , from which i gather that he slip down with such velocity that he take the skin off his hand . " " this be all very well , " say i , " but the thing become more unintelligible than ever . how about this mysterious ally ? how come he into the room ? " " yes , the ally ! " repeat , pensively . " there be feature of interest about this ally . he lift the case from the region of the commonplace . i fancy that this ally break fresh ground in the annals of crime in this country , -- parallel case suggest themselves from , and , if my memory serve me , from . " " how come he , then ? " i reiterate . " the door be lock , the window be inaccessible . be it through the chimney ? " " the grate be much too small , " he answer . " i have already consider that possibility . " " how then ? " i persist . " you will not apply my precept , " he say , shake his head . " how often have i say to you that when you have eliminate the impossible whatever remain , , must be the truth ? we know that he do not come through the door , the window , or the chimney . we also know that he could not have be conceal in the room , as there be no concealment possible . whence , then , do he come ? " " he come through the hole in the roof , " i cry . " of course he do . he must have do so . if you will have the kindness to hold the lamp for me , we shall now extend our research to the room above , -- secret room in which the treasure be find . " he mount the step , and , seize a rafter with either hand , he swing himself up into the garret . then , lie on his face , he reach down for the lamp and hold it while i follow him . the chamber in which we find ourselves be about ten foot one way and six the other . the floor be form by the rafter , with thin between , so that in walk one have to step from beam to beam . the roof run up to an apex , and be evidently the inner shell of the true roof of the house . there be no furniture of any sort , and the accumulate dust of year lie thick upon the floor . " here you be , you see , " say , put his hand against the sloping wall . " this be a trap-door which lead out on to the roof . i can press it back , and here be the roof itself , slope at a gentle angle . this , then , be the way by which enter . let us see if we can find any other trace of his individuality . " he hold down the lamp to the floor , and as he do so i see for the second time that night a startle , surprised look come over his face . for myself , as i follow his gaze my skin be cold under my clothes . the floor be cover thickly with the print of a naked foot , -- , well define , perfectly form , but scarce half the size of those of an ordinary man . " , " i say , in a whisper , " a child have do the horrid thing . " he have recover his self-possession in an instant . " i be stagger for the moment , " he say , " but the thing be quite natural . my memory fail me , or i should have be able to foretell it . there be nothing more to be learn here . let us go down . " " what be your theory , then , as to those footmark ? " i ask , eagerly , when we have regain the low room once more . " my dear , try a little analysis yourself , " say he , with a touch of impatience . " you know my method . apply them , and it will be instructive to compare result . " " i can conceive anything which will cover the fact , " i answer . " it will be clear enough to you soon , " he say , in an off-hand way . " i think that there be nothing else of importance here , but i will look . " he whip out his lens and a tape measure , and hurry about the room on his knee , measure , compare , examine , with his long thin nose only a few inch from the plank , and his beady eye gleam and deep-set like those of a bird . so swift , silent , and furtive be his movement , like those of a trained pick out a scent , that i could not but think what a terrible criminal he would have make have he turn his energy and sagacity against the law , instead of exert them in its defense . as he hunt about , he keep mutter to himself , and finally he break out into a loud crow of delight . " we be certainly in luck , " say he . " we ought to have very little trouble now . number one have have the misfortune to tread in the creosote . you can see the outline of the edge of his small foot here at the side of this mess . the carboy have be crack , you see , and the stuff have leak out . " " what then ? " i ask . " why , we have get him , that be all , " say he . " i know a dog that would follow that scent to the world 's end . if a pack can track a trail herring across a shire , how far can a hound follow so pungent a smell as this ? it sound like a sum in the rule of three . the answer should give us halloo ! here be the accredit representative of the law . " heavy step and the clamor of loud voice be audible from below , and the hall door shut with a loud crash . " before they come , " say , " just put your hand here on this poor fellow 's arm , and here on his leg . what do you feel ? " " the muscle be as hard as a board , " i answer . " quite so . they be in a state of extreme contraction , far exceed the usual rigor mortis . couple with this distortion of the face , this hippocratic smile , or ' , ' as the old writer call it , what conclusion would it suggest to your mind ? " " death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid , " i answer , -- substance which would produce tetanus . " " that be the idea which occur to me the instant i see the draw muscle of the face . on get into the room i at once look for the means by which the poison have enter the system . as you see , i discover a thorn which have be drive or shoot with no great force into the scalp . you observe that the part strike be that which would be turn towards the hole in the ceiling if the man be erect in his chair . now examine the thorn . " i take it up gingerly and hold it in the light of the lantern . it be long , sharp , and black , with a glaze look near the point as though some gummy substance have dry upon it . the blunt end have be trim and round off with a knife . " be that an english thorn ? " he ask . " no , it certainly be not . " " with all these datum you should be able to draw some just inference . but here be the regular : so the auxiliary force may beat a retreat . " as he speak , the step which have be come near sound loudly on the passage , and a very stout , portly man in a gray suit stride heavily into the room . he be red-faced , burly and , with a pair of very small twinkling eye which look keenly out from between swollen and puffy pouch . he be closely follow by an inspector in uniform , and by the still palpitate . " here be a business ! " he cry , in a muffle , husky voice . " here be a pretty business ! but who be all these ? why , the house seem to be as full as a rabbit-warren ! " " i think you must recollect me , , " say , quietly . " why , of course i do ! " he wheeze . " it be , the theorist . remember you ! i will never forget how you lecture us all on cause and inference and effect in the jewel case . it be true you set us on the right track ; but you will own now that it be more by good luck than good guidance . " " it be a piece of very simple reasoning . " " oh , come , now , come ! never be ashamed to own up . but what be all this ? bad business ! bad business ! fact here , -- room for theory . how lucky that i happen to be out at over another case ! i be at the station when the message arrive . what think the man die of ? " " oh , this be hardly a case for me to theorize over , " say , dryly . " no , no . still , we ca n't deny that you hit the nail on the head sometimes . dear me ! door lock , i understand . jewel worth half a million missing . how be the window ? " " fasten ; but there be step on the sill . " " well , well , if it be fasten the step could have nothing to do with the matter . that be common sense . man might have die in a fit ; but then the jewel be miss . ! i have a theory . these flash come upon me at time . -- step outside , sergeant , and you , . your friend can remain . -- do you think of this , ? be , on his own confession , with his brother last night . the brother die in a fit , on which walk off with the treasure . how be that ? " " on which the dead man very considerately get up and lock the door on the inside . " " hum ! there be a flaw there . let us apply common sense to the matter . this with his brother ; there a quarrel ; so much we know . the brother be dead and the jewel be go . so much also we know . no one see the brother from the time leave him . his bed have not be sleep in . be evidently in a most disturbed state of mind . his appearance , not attractive . you see that i be weave my web round . the net begin to close upon him . " " you be not quite in possession of the fact yet , " say . " this splinter of wood , which i have every reason to believe to be poison , be in the man 's scalp where you still see the mark ; this card , inscribe as you see it , be on the table ; and beside it lie this rather curious instrument . how do all that fit into your theory ? " " confirm it in every respect , " say the fat detective , pompously . " be full of indian curiosity . bring this up , and if this splinter be poisonous may as well have make murderous use of it as any other man . the card be some hocus-pocus , -- blind , as like as not . the only question be , how do he depart ? ah , of course , here be a hole in the roof . " with great activity , consider his bulk , he spring up the step and squeeze through into the garret , and immediately afterwards we hear his exult voice proclaim that he have find the trap-door . " he can find something , " remark , shrug his shoulder . " he have occasional glimmering of reason . a pas des sot incommode ! " you see ! " say , reappear down the step again . " fact be good than mere theory , after all . my view of the case be confirm . there be a trap-door communicate with the roof , and it be partly open . " " it be i who open it . " " oh , indeed ! you do notice it , then ? " he seem a little crestfallen at the discovery . " well , whoever notice it , it show how our gentleman get away . inspector ! " " yes , sir , " from the passage . " ask to step this way . -- . , it be my duty to inform you that anything which you may say will be use against you . i arrest you in the queen 's name as be concern in the death of your brother . " " there , now ! do n't i tell you ! " cry the poor little man , throw out his hand , and look from one to the other of us . " do n't trouble yourself about it , , " say . " i think that i can engage to clear you of the charge . " " do n't promise too much , , -- n't promise too much ! " snap the detective . " you may find it a hard matter than you think . " " not only will i clear him , , but i will make you a free present of the name and description of one of the two people who be in this room last night . his name , i have every reason to believe , be . he be a man , small , active , with his right leg off , and wear a wooden stump which be wear away upon the inner side . his left boot have a coarse , square-toed sole , with an iron band round the heel . he be a middle-aged man , much sunburned , and have be a convict . these few indication may be of some assistance to you , couple with the fact that there be a good deal of skin miss from the palm of his hand . the other -- " " ah ! the other -- ? " ask , in a sneering voice , but impressed none the less , as i could easily see , by the precision of the other 's manner . " be a rather curious person , " say , turn upon his heel . " i hope before very long to be able to introduce you to the pair of them . -- word with you , . " he lead me out to the head of the stair . " this unexpected occurrence , " he say , " have cause us rather to lose sight of the original purpose of our journey . " " i have just be think so , " i answer . " it be not right that should remain in this stricken house . " " no. you must escort her home . she live with , in : so it be not very far . i will wait for you here if you will drive out again . or perhaps you be too tired ? " " by no mean . i do n't think i could rest until i know more of this fantastic business . i have see something of the rough side of life , but i give you my word that this quick succession of strange surprise have shake my nerve completely . i should like , however , to see the matter through with you , now that i have get so far . " " your presence will be of great service to me , " he answer . " we shall work the case out independently , and leave this fellow to exult over any mare's-nest which he may choose to construct . when you have drop i wish you to go on to no. 3 , down near the water 's edge at . the third house on the right-hand side be a 's : be the name . you will see a weasel hold a young rabbit in the window . knock old up , and tell him , with my compliment , that i want at once . you will bring back in the cab with you . " " a dog , i suppose . " " yes , -- queer mongrel , with a most amazing power of scent . i would rather have 's help than that of the whole detective force of . " " i shall bring him , then , " say " it be one now . i ought to be back before three , if i can get a fresh horse . " " and i , " say , " shall see what i can learn from , and from the indian servant , who , tell me , sleep in the next garret . then i shall study the great 's method and listen to his not too delicate sarcasm . ' die be . ' be always pithy . " the police have bring a cab with them , and in this i escort back to her home . after the angelic fashion of woman , she have bear trouble with a calm face as long as there be some one weak than herself to support , and i have find her bright and placid by the side of the frightened housekeeper . in the cab , however , she first turn faint , and then burst into a passion of weeping , -- sorely have she be try by the adventure of the night . she have tell me since that she think me cold and distant upon that journey . she little guess the struggle within my breast , or the effort of self-restraint which hold me back . my sympathy and my love go out to her , even as my hand have in the garden . i feel that year of the conventionality of life could not teach me to know her sweet , brave nature as have this one day of strange experience . yet there be two thought which seal the word of affection upon my lip . she be weak and helpless , shake in mind and nerve . it be to take her at a disadvantage to obtrude love upon her at such a time . worse still , she be rich . if 's research be successful , she would be an heiress . be it fair , be it honorable , that a half-pay surgeon should take such advantage of an intimacy which chance have bring about ? might she not look upon me as a mere vulgar ? i could not bear to risk that such a thought should cross her mind . this treasure intervene like an impassable barrier between us . it be nearly two o'clock when we reach 's . the servant have retire hour ago , but have be so interested by the strange message which have receive that she have sit up in the hope of her return . she open the door herself , a middle-aged , graceful woman , and it give me joy to see how tenderly her arm steal round the other 's waist and how motherly be the voice in which she greet her . she be clearly no mere pay dependant , but an honor friend . i be introduce , and earnestly beg me to step in and tell her our adventure . i explain , however , the importance of my errand , and promise faithfully to call and report any progress which we might make with the case . as we drive away i steal a glance back , and i still seem to see that little group on the step , the two graceful , cling figure , the door , the hall light shine through stain glass , the barometer , and the bright stair-rod . it be soothe to catch even that pass glimpse of a tranquil english home in the midst of the wild , dark business which have absorb us . and the more i think of what have happen , the wild and dark it grow . i review the whole extraordinary sequence of event as i rattle on through the silent street . there be the original problem : that at least be pretty clear now . the death of , the send of the pearl , the advertisement , the letter , -- have have light upon all those event . they have only lead us , however , to a deep and far more tragic mystery . the indian treasure , the curious plan find among 's baggage , the strange scene at 's death , the rediscovery of the treasure immediately follow by the murder of the discoverer , the very singular accompaniment to the crime , the footstep , the remarkable weapon , the word upon the card , corresponding with those upon 's chart , -- be indeed a labyrinth in which a man less singularly endow than my might well despair of ever find the clue . be a row of shabby brick house in the low quarter of . i have to knock for some time at no. 3 before i could make my impression . at last , however , there be the glint of a candle behind the blind , and a face look out at the upper window . " go on , you drunken , " say the face . " if you kick up any more row i will open the kennel and let out dog upon you . " " if you will let one out it be just what i have come for , " say " go on ! " yell the voice . " so help me gracious , i have a wiper in the bag , an ' i will drop it on your ' if you do n't hook it . " " but i want a dog , " i cry . " i wo n't be argue with ! " shout . " now stand clear , for when i say ' three , ' down go the wiper . " " -- " i begin , but the word have a most magical effect , for the window instantly slam down , and within a minute the door be unbar and open . be a lanky , lean old man , with stoop shoulder , a stringy neck , and glass . " a friend of be always welcome , " say he . " step in , sir . keep clear of the badger ; for he bite . ah , naughty , naughty , would you take a nip at the gentleman ? " this to a stoat which thrust its wicked head and red eye between the bar of its cage . " do n't mind that , sir : it be only a slow-worm . it hai n't get no fang , so i give it the run o ' the room , for it keep the beetle down . you must not mind my ' just a little short ' you at first , for i be guy at by the child , and there be many a one just come down this lane to knock me up . what be it that want , sir ? " " he want a dog of yours . " " ah ! that would be . " " yes , be the name . " " live at no. 7 on the left here . " he move slowly forward with his candle among the queer animal family which he have gather round him . in the uncertain , shadowy light i could see dimly that there be glance , glimmer eye peep down at us from every cranny and corner . even the rafter above our head be line by solemn fowl , who lazily shift their weight from one leg to the other as our voice disturb their slumber . prove to be an ugly , long-haired , lop-eared creature , half spaniel and half lurcher , in color , with a very clumsy waddle gait . it accept after some hesitation a lump of sugar which the old naturalist hand to me , and , have thus seal an alliance , it follow me to the cab , and make no difficulty about accompany me . it have just strike three on the clock when i find myself back once more at . the have , i find , be arrest as an accessory , and both he and have be march off to the station . two constable guard the narrow gate , but they allow me to pass with the dog on my mention the detective 's name . be stand on the , with his hand in his pocket , smoke his pipe . " ah , you have him there ! " say he . " good dog , then ! have go . we have have an immense display of energy since you leave . he have arrest not only friend , but the gatekeeper , the housekeeper , and the indian servant . we have the place to ourselves , but for a sergeant . leave the dog here , and come up . " we tie to the hall table , and the stair . the room be as he have leave it , save that a sheet have be drape over the central figure . a weary-looking recline in the corner . " lend me your bull's-eye , sergeant , " say my companion . " now tie this bit of card round my neck , so as to hang it in front of me . thank you . now i must kick off my boot and stocking . -- you carry them down with you , . i be go to do a little climbing . and dip my handkerchief into the . that will do . now come up into the garret with me for a moment . " we clamber up through the hole . turn his light once more upon the footstep in the dust . " i wish you particularly to notice these footmark , " he say . " do you observe anything noteworthy about them ? " " they belong , " i say , " to a child or a small woman . " " apart from their size , though . be there nothing else ? " " they appear to be much as other footmark . " " not at all . look here ! this be the print of a right foot in the dust . now i make one with my naked foot beside it . what be the chief difference ? " " your toe be all cramp together . the other print have each toe distinctly divide . " " quite so . that be the point . bear that in mind . now , would you kindly step over to that and smell the edge of the ? i shall stay here , as i have this handkerchief in my hand . " i do as he direct , and be instantly conscious of a strong tarry smell . " that be where he put his foot in get out . if you can trace him , i should think that will have no difficulty . now run , loose the dog , and look out for . " by the time that i get out into the ground be on the roof , and i could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawl very slowly along the ridge . i lose sight of him behind a stack of chimney , but he presently reappear , and then vanish once more upon the opposite side . when i make my way round there i find him seat at one of the corner eaves . " that you , ? " he cry . " yes . " " this be the place . what be that black thing down there ? " " a . " " top on it ? " " yes . " " no sign of a ladder ? " " no. " " the fellow ! it be a most place . i ought to be able to come down where he could climb up . the feel pretty firm . here go , anyhow . " there be a scuffle of foot , and the lantern begin to come steadily down the side of the wall . then with a light spring he come on to the barrel , and from there to the earth . " it be easy to follow him , " he say , draw on his stocking and boot . " tile be loosen the whole way along , and in his hurry he have drop this . it confirm my diagnosis , as you doctor express it . " the object which he hold up to me be a small pocket or pouch weave out of color grass and with a few tawdry bead string round it . in shape and size it be not unlike a cigarette-case . inside be half a dozen spine of dark wood , sharp at one end and round at the other , like that which have strike . " they be hellish thing , " say he . " look out that you do n't prick yourself . i be delight to have them , for the chance be that they be all he have . there be the less fear of you or me find one in our skin before long . i would sooner face a bullet , myself . be you game for a six-mile trudge , ? " " certainly , " i answer . " your leg will stand it ? " " oh , yes . " " here you be , doggy ! good old ! smell it , , smell it ! " he push the handkerchief under the dog 's nose , while the creature stand with its fluffy leg separate , and with a most comical cock to its head , like a connoisseur sniff the bouquet of a famous vintage . then throw the handkerchief to a distance , fasten a stout cord to the mongrel 's collar , and lead him to the foot of the . the creature instantly break into a succession of high , tremulous yelp , and , with his nose on the ground , and his tail in the air , patter off upon the trail at a pace which strain his leash and keep us at the top of our speed . the east have be gradually whiten , and we could now see some distance in the cold gray light . the square , massive house , with its black , empty window and high , bare wall , towered up , sad and forlorn , behind us . our course lead right across the ground , in and out among the trench and pit with which they be scar and intersect . the whole place , with its scattered and shrub , have a blight , ill-omened look which harmonize with the black tragedy which hang over it . on reach the boundary wall run along , whine eagerly , underneath its shadow , and stop finally in a corner screen by a young beech . where the two wall join , several brick have be loosen , and the crevice leave be wear down and round upon the low side , as though they have frequently be use as a ladder . clamber up , and , take the dog from me , he drop it over upon the other side . " there be the print of 's hand , " he remark , as i mount up beside him . " you see the slight smudge of blood upon the white plaster . what a lucky thing it be that we have have no very heavy rain since yesterday ! the scent will lie upon the road in spite of their hour ' start . " i confess that i have my doubt myself when i reflect upon the great traffic which have pass along the road in the interval . my fear be soon appease , however . never hesitate or swerve , but waddle on in his peculiar rolling fashion . clearly , the pungent smell of the rise high above all other contend scent . " do not imagine , " say , " that i depend for my success in this case upon the mere chance of one of these fellow have put his foot in the chemical . i have knowledge now which would enable me to trace them in many different way . this , however , be the ready and , since fortune have put it into our hand , i should be culpable if i neglect it . it have , however , prevent the case from become the pretty little intellectual problem which it at one time promise to be . there might have be some credit to be gain out of it , but for this too palpable clue . " " there be credit , and to spare , " say " i assure you , , that i marvel at the means by which you obtain your result in this case , even more than i do in the . the thing seem to me to be deep and more inexplicable . how , for example , could you describe with such confidence the man ? " " , my dear boy ! it be simplicity itself . i do n't wish to be theatrical . it be all patent and above-board . two officer who be in command of a learn an important secret as to bury treasure . a map be draw for them by an englishman name . you remember that we see the name upon the chart in 's possession . he have sign it in behalf of himself and his associate , -- sign of the four , as he somewhat dramatically call it . aid by this chart , the one of the treasure and bring it to , leave , we will suppose , some condition under which he receive it unfulfilled . now , then , why do not get the treasure himself ? the answer be obvious . the chart be date at a time when be bring into close association with convict . do not get the treasure because he and his associate be themselves convict and could not get away . " " but that be mere speculation , " say " it be more than that . it be the only hypothesis which cover the fact . let us see how it fit in with the sequel . remain at peace for some year , happy in the possession of his treasure . then he receive a letter from which give him a great fright . what be that ? " " a letter to say that the man whom he have wrong have be set free . " " or have escape . that be much more likely , for he would have know what their term of imprisonment be . it would not have be a surprise to him . what do he do then ? he guard himself against a man , -- white man , mark you , for he mistake a white tradesman for him , and actually fire a pistol at him . now , only one white man 's name be on the chart . the other be or mohammedan . there be no other white man . therefore we may say with confidence that the man be identical with . do the reasoning strike you as be faulty ? " " no : it be clear and concise . " " well , now , let us put ourselves in the place of . let us look at it from his point of view . he come to with the double idea of regain what he would consider to be his right and of have his revenge upon the man who have wrong him . he find out where live , and very possibly he establish communication with some one inside the house . there be this butler , , whom we have not see . give him far from a good character . could not find out , however , where the treasure be hide , for no one ever know , save the major and one faithful servant who have die . suddenly learn that the major be on his death-bed . in a frenzy lest the secret of the treasure die with him , he run the gauntlet of the guard , make his way to the die man 's window , and be only deter from enter by the presence of his two son . mad with hate , however , against the dead man , he enter the room that night , search his private paper in the hope of discover some memorandum relate to the treasure , and finally leave a of his visit in the short inscription upon the card . he have doubtless plan beforehand that should he slay the major he would leave some such record upon the body as a sign that it be not a common murder , but , from the point of view of the four associate , something in the nature of an act of justice . whimsical and bizarre conceit of this kind be common enough in the annals of crime , and usually afford valuable indication as to the criminal . do you follow all this ? " " very clearly . " " now , what could do ? he could only continue to keep a secret watch upon the effort make to find the treasure . possibly he leave and only come back at interval . then come the discovery of the garret , and he be instantly inform of it . we again trace the presence of some confederate in the household . , with his wooden leg , be utterly unable to reach the lofty room of . he take with him , however , a rather curious associate , who get over this difficulty , but dip his naked foot into , whence come , and a six-mile limp for a half-pay officer with a damaged . " " but it be the associate , and not , who commit the crime . " " quite so . and rather to 's disgust , to judge by the way he stamp about when he get into the room . he bear no grudge against , and would have preferred if he could have be simply bind and gag . he do not wish to put his head in a halter . there be no help for it , however : the savage instinct of his companion have break out , and the poison have do its work : so leave his record , lower the to the ground , and follow it himself . that be the train of event as far as i can decipher them . of course as to his personal appearance he must be middle-aged , and must be sunburned after serve his time in such an oven as the . his height be readily calculate from the length of his stride , and we know that he be bearded . his hairiness be the one point which impress itself upon when he see him at the window . i do n't know that there be anything else . " " the associate ? " " ah , well , there be no great mystery in that . but you will know all about it soon enough . how sweet the morning air be ! see how that one little cloud float like a pink feather from some gigantic flamingo . now the red rim of the sun push itself over the cloud-bank . it shine on a good many folk , but on none , i dare bet , who be on a stranger errand than you and how small we feel with our petty ambition and in the presence of the great elemental force of nature ! be you well up in your ? " " fairly so . i work back to him through . " " that be like follow the brook to the parent lake . he make one curious but profound remark . it be that the chief proof of man 's real greatness lie in his perception of his own smallness . it argue , you see , a power of comparison and of appreciation which be in itself a proof of nobility . there be much food for thought in . you have not a pistol , have you ? " " i have my stick . " " it be just possible that we may need something of the sort if we get to their lair . i shall leave to you , but if the other turn nasty i shall shoot him dead . " he take out his revolver as he speak , and , have load two of the chamber , he put it back into the right-hand pocket of his jacket . we have during this time be follow the guidance of down the road which lead to the metropolis . now , however , we be begin to come among continuous street , where laborer and be already astir , and slatternly woman be take down shutter and brush . at the corner public house business be just begin , and man be emerge , rub their sleeve across their beard after their morning wet . strange dog saunter up and stare wonderingly at us as we pass , but our inimitable look neither to the right nor to the left , but trot onwards with his nose to the ground and an occasional eager whine which speak of a hot scent . we have traverse , , , and now find ourselves in , have bear away through the to the east of the oval . the man whom we pursue seem to have take a curiously zigzag road , with the idea probably of escape observation . they have never keep to the main road if a parallel would serve their turn . at the foot of they have edge away to the left through and . where the latter street turn into 's place , cease to advance , but begin to run backwards and forwards with one ear cock and the other droop , the very picture of canine indecision . then he waddle round in circle , look up to us from time to time , as if to ask for sympathy in his embarrassment . " what the deuce be the matter with the dog ? " growl . " they surely would not take a cab , or go off in a balloon . " " perhaps they stand here for some time , " i suggest . " ah ! it be all right . he be off again , " say my companion , in a tone of relief . he be indeed off , for after sniff round again he suddenly make up his mind , and dart away with an energy and determination such as he have not yet show . the scent appear to be much hot than before , for he have not even to put his nose on the ground , but tug at his leash and try to break into a run . i cold see by the gleam in 's eye that he think we be near the end of our journey . our course now run down nine until we come to and 's large , just past the tavern . here the dog , frantic with excitement , turn down through the into the enclosure , where the sawyer be already at work . on the dog race through sawdust and shaving , down an alley , round a passage , between two , and finally , with a triumphant yelp , spring upon a large barrel which still stand upon the on which it have be bring . with loll tongue and blink eye , stand upon the cask , look from one to the other of us for some sign of appreciation . the stave of the barrel and the wheel of the trolley be smear with a dark liquid , and the whole air be heavy with the smell of . and i look blankly at each other , and then burst simultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter . " what now ? " i ask . " have lose his character for infallibility . " " he act accord to his light , " say , lift him down from the barrel and walk him out of the . " if you consider how much be cart about in one day , it be no great wonder that our trail should have be cross . it be much use now , especially for the seasoning of wood . be not to blame . " " we must get on the main scent again , i suppose . " " yes . and , fortunately , we have no distance to go . evidently what puzzle the dog at the corner of 's place be that there be two different trail run in opposite direction . we take the wrong one . it only remain to follow the other . " there be no difficulty about this . on lead to the place where he have commit his fault , he cast about in a wide circle and finally dash off in a fresh direction . " we must take care that he do not now bring us to the place where the come from , " i observe . " i have think of that . but you notice that he keep on the pavement , whereas the barrel pass down the roadway . no , we be on the true scent now . " it tend down towards the , run through and 's . at the end of it run right down to the water 's edge , where there be a small wooden wharf . lead us to the very edge of this , and there stand whine , look out on the dark current beyond . " we be out of luck , " say . " they have take to a boat here . " several small punt and skiff be lie about in the water and on the edge of the wharf . we take round to each in turn , but , though he sniff earnestly , he make no sign . close to the rude landing-stage be a small brick house , with a wooden placard sling out through the second window . " " be print across it in large letter , and , underneath , " to hire by the hour or day . " a second inscription above the door inform us that a steam launch be keep , -- statement which be confirm by a great pile of coke upon the jetty . look slowly round , and his face assume an ominous expression . " this look bad , " say he . " these fellow be sharp than i expect . they seem to have cover their track . there have , i fear , be preconcerted management here . " he be approach the door of the house , when it open , and a little , lad of six come run out , follow by a stoutish , red-faced woman with a large sponge in her hand . " you come back and be wash , , " she shout . " come back , you young imp ; for if your father come home and find you like that , he will let us hear of it . " " dear little chap ! " say , strategically . " what a rosy-cheeked young rascal ! now , , be there anything you would like ? " the youth ponder for a moment . " i will like a ' , " say he . " nothing you would like well ? " " i will like two ' good , " the prodigy answer , after some thought . " here you be , then ! catch ! -- fine child , ! " " ' bless you , sir , he be that , and forward . he get too much for me to manage , ' specially when my man be away day at a time . " " away , be he ? " say , in a disappointed voice . " i be sorry for that , for i want to speak to . " " he have be away since yesterday ' , sir , and , truth to tell , i be ' to feel frightened about him . but if it be about a boat , sir , maybe i could serve as well . " " i want to hire his steam launch . " " why , bless you , sir , it be in the steam launch that he have go . that be what puzzle me ; for i know there ai n't more coal in her than would take her to about and back . if he have be away in the barge i have ' thought ' ; for many a time a job have take him as far as , and then if there be much ' there he might ' stay over . but what good be a steam launch without coal ? " " he might have buy some at a wharf down the river . " " he might , sir , but it be n't his way . many a time i have hear him call out at the price they charge for a few odd bag . besides , i do n't like that man , ' his ugly face and outlandish talk . what do he want always ' about here for ? " " a man ? " say , with bland surprise . " yes , sir , a brown , chap that have call once for my old man . it be him that rouse him up , and , what be more , my man know he be ' , for he have steam up in the launch . i tell you straight , sir , i do n't feel easy in my mind about it . " " but , my dear , " say , shrug his shoulder , " you be frighten yourself about nothing . how could you possibly tell that it be the man who come in the night ? i do n't quite understand how you can be so sure . " " his voice , sir . i know his voice , which be kind o ' thick and foggy . he tap at the winder , -- three it would be . ' show a leg , matey , ' say he : ' time to turn out guard . ' my old man wake up , -- be my eldest , -- away they go , without so much as a word to me . i could hear the wooden leg ' on the stone . " " and be this man alone ? " " could n't say , i be sure , sir . i do n't hear no one else . " " i be sorry , , for i want a steam launch , and i have hear good report of me see , what be her name ? " " the , sir . " " ah ! she be not that old green launch with a yellow line , very broad in the beam ? " " no , indeed . she be as trim a little thing as any on the river . she have be fresh painted , black with two red streak . " " thank . i hope that you will hear soon from . i be go down the river ; and if i should see anything of the i shall let him know that you be uneasy . a black funnel , you say ? " " no , sir . black with a white band . " " ah , of course . it be the side which be black . , . -- be a boatman here with a wherry , . we shall take it and cross the river . " the main thing with people of that sort , " say , as we sit in the sheet of the wherry , " be never to let them think that their information can be of the slight importance to you . if you do , they will instantly shut up like an oyster . if you listen to them under protest , as it be , you be very likely to get what you want . " " our course now seem pretty clear , " say " what would you do , then ? " " i would engage a launch and go down the river on the track of the . " " my dear fellow , it would be a colossal task . she may have touch at any wharf on either side of the stream between here and . below the bridge there be a perfect labyrinth of landing-place for mile . it would take you day and day to exhaust them , if you set about it alone . " " employ the police , then . " " no. i shall probably call in at the last moment . he be not a bad fellow , and i should not like to do anything which would injure him professionally . but i have a fancy for work it out myself , now that we have go so far . " " could we advertise , then , ask for information from wharfinger ? " " bad and bad ! our man would know that the chase be hot at their heel , and they would be off out of the country . as it be , they be likely enough to leave , but as long as they think they be perfectly safe they will be in no hurry . 's energy will be of use to us there , for his view of the case be sure to push itself into the daily press , and the runaway will think that every one be off on the wrong scent . " " what be we to do , then ? " i ask , as we land near . " take this hansom , drive home , have some breakfast , and get an hour 's sleep . it be quite on the card that we may be afoot again . stop at a , cabby ! we will keep , for he may be of use to us yet . " we pull up at the post-office , and despatch his wire . " whom do you think that be to ? " he ask , as we resume our journey . " i be sure i do n't know . " " you remember the division of the detective police force whom i employ in the case ? " " well , " say i , laugh . " this be just the case where they might be invaluable . if they fail , i have other resource ; but i shall try them first . that wire be to my dirty little lieutenant , , and i expect that he and his gang will be with us before we have finish our breakfast . " it be between eight and nine o'clock now , and i be conscious of a strong reaction after the successive excitement of the night . i be limp and weary , befog in mind and fatigue in body . i have not the professional enthusiasm which carry my companion on , nor could i look at the matter as a mere abstract intellectual problem . as far as the death of go , i have hear little good of him , and could feel no intense antipathy to his murderer . the treasure , however , be a different matter . that , or part of it , belong rightfully to . while there be a chance of recover it i be ready to devote my life to the one object . true , if i find it it would probably put her forever beyond my reach . yet it would be a petty and selfish love which would be influence by such a thought as that . if could work to find the criminal , i have a tenfold strong reason to urge me on to find the treasure . a bath at and a complete change freshen me up wonderfully . when i come down to our room i find the breakfast lay and pour out the coffee . " here it be , " say he , laugh , and point to an open newspaper . " the energetic and the ubiquitous reporter have fix it up between them . but you have have enough of the case . well have your ham and egg first . " i take the paper from him and read the short notice , which be head " at . " " about twelve o'clock last night , " say the , " , of , , be find dead in his room under circumstance which point to foul play . as far as we can learn , no actual trace of violence be find upon 's person , but a valuable collection of indian gem which the deceased gentleman have inherit from his father have be carry off . the discovery be first make by and , who have call at the house with , brother of the deceased . by a singular piece of good fortune , , the well-known member of the detective police force , happen to be at the , and be on the ground within half an hour of the first alarm . his trained and experienced faculty be at once direct towards the detection of the criminal , with the gratifying result that the brother , , have already be arrest , together with the housekeeper , , an indian butler name , and a porter , or gatekeeper , name . it be quite certain that the thief or thief be well acquaint with the house , for 's well-known technical knowledge and his power of minute observation have enable him to prove conclusively that the miscreant could not have enter by the door or by the window , but must have make their way across the roof of the building , and so through a trap-door into a room which communicate with that in which the body be find . this fact , which have be very clearly make out , prove conclusively that it be no mere haphazard burglary . the prompt and energetic action of the officer of the law show the great advantage of the presence on such occasion of a single vigorous and masterful mind . we can but think that it supply an argument to those who would wish to see our detective more decentralized , and so bring into closer and more effective touch with the case which it be their duty to investigate . " " be n't it gorgeous ! " say , grin over his . " what do you think of it ? " " i think that we have have a close shave ourselves of be arrest for the crime . " " so do i. i would n't answer for our safety now , if he should happen to have another of his attack of energy . " at this moment there be a loud ring at the bell , and i could hear , our landlady , raise her voice in a wail of expostulation and dismay . " by heaven , , " i say , half rise , " i believe that they be really after us . " " no , it be not quite so bad as that . it be the unofficial force , -- irregular . " as he speak , there come a swift patter of naked foot upon the stair , a clatter of high voice , and in rush a dozen dirty and ragged little . there be some show of discipline among them , despite their tumultuous entry , for they instantly draw up in line and stand face us with expectant face . one of their number , tall and old than the other , stand forward with an air of lounge superiority which be very funny in such a disreputable little scarecrow . " get your message , sir , " say he , " and bring ' em on sharp . three bob and a tanner for ticket . " " here you be , " say , produce some silver . " in future they can report to you , , and you to me . i can have the house invade in this way . however , it be just as well that you should all hear the instruction . i want to find the whereabouts of a steam launch call the , owner , black with two red streak , funnel black with a white band . she be down the river somewhere . i want one boy to be at 's landing-stage opposite to say if the boat come back . you must divide it out among , and do both bank thoroughly . let me know the moment you have news . be that all clear ? " " yes , guv'nor , " say . " the old scale of pay , and a guinea to the boy who find the boat . here be a day in advance . now off you go ! " he hand them a shilling each , and away they buzz down the stair , and i see them a moment later stream down the street . " if the launch be above water they will find her , " say , as he rise from the table and light his pipe . " they can go everywhere , see everything , overhear every one . i expect to hear before evening that they have spot her . in the mean while , we can do nothing but await result . we can pick up the break trail until we find either the or . " " could eat these scrap , i dare say . be you go to bed , ? " " no : i be not tired . i have a curious constitution . i never remember feel tired by work , though idleness exhaust me completely . i be go to smoke and to think over this queer business to which my fair client have introduce us . if ever man have an easy task , this of ours ought to be . man be not so common , but the other man must , i should think , be absolutely unique . " " that other man again ! " " i have no wish to make a mystery of him , -- you , anyway . but you must have form your own opinion . now , do consider the datum . diminutive footmark , toe never fetter by boot , naked foot , wooden mace , great agility , small poison dart . what do you make of all this ? " " a savage ! " i exclaim . " perhaps one of those who be the associate of . " " hardly that , " say he . " when first i see sign of strange weapon i be incline to think so ; but the remarkable character of the footmark cause me to reconsider my view . some of the inhabitant of the be small man , but none could have leave such mark as that . the hindoo proper have long and thin foot . the mohammedan have the great toe well separate from the other , because the thong be commonly pass between . these little darts , too , could only be shoot in one way . they be from a . now , then , where be we to find our savage ? " " , " i hazard . he stretch his hand up , and take down a bulky volume from the shelf . " this be the first volume of a gazetteer which be now be publish . it may be look upon as the very late authority . what have we here ? ' , situate @card@ mile to the north of , in the of . ' ! hum ! what be all this ? moist climate , coral reef , shark , , , , , here we be . ' the aborigine of the may perhaps claim the distinction of be the small race upon this earth , though some anthropologist prefer the bushman of , the of , and the . the average height be rather below four foot , although many full-grown adult may be find who be very much small than this . they be a fierce , morose , and intractable people , though capable of form most devoted friendship when their confidence have once be gain . ' that , . now , then , listen to this . ' they be naturally hideous , have large , misshapen head , small , fierce eye , and distorted feature . their foot and hand , however , be remarkably small . so intractable and fierce be they that all the effort of the british official have fail to win them over in any degree . they have always be a terror to shipwreck crew , brain the survivor with their club , or shoot them with their poison arrow . these massacre be invariably conclude by a cannibal feast . ' , amiable people , ! if this fellow have be leave to his own unaided device this affair might have take an even more ghastly turn . i fancy that , even as it be , would give a good deal not to have employ him . " " but how come he to have so singular a companion ? " " ah , that be more than i can tell . since , however , we have already determine that have come from the , it be not so very wonderful that this islander should be with him . no doubt we shall know all about it in time . look here , ; you look regularly do . lie down there on the sofa , and see if i can put you to sleep . " he take up his violin from the corner , and as i stretch myself out he begin to play some low , dreamy , melodious air , -- own , no doubt , for he have a remarkable gift for improvisation . i have a vague remembrance of his gaunt limb , his earnest face , and the rise and fall of his bow . then i seem to be float peacefully away upon a soft sea of sound , until i find myself in , with the sweet face of look down upon me . it be late in the afternoon before i wake , strengthen and refresh . still sit exactly as i have leave him , save that he have lay aside his violin and be deep in a book . he look across at me , as i stir , and i notice that his face be dark and troubled . " you have sleep soundly , " he say . " i fear that our talk would wake you . " " i hear nothing , " i answer . " have you have fresh news , then ? " " unfortunately , no . i confess that i be surprise and disappoint . i expect something definite by this time . have just be up to report . he say that no trace can be find of the launch . it be a provoking check , for every hour be of importance . " " can i do anything ? i be perfectly fresh now , and quite ready for another night 's outing . " " no , we can do nothing . we can only wait . if we go ourselves , the message might come in our absence , and delay be cause . you can do what you will , but i must remain on guard . " " then i shall run over to and call upon . she ask me to , yesterday . " " on ? " ask , with the twinkle of a smile in his eye . " well , of course too . they be anxious to hear what happen . " " i would not tell them too much , " say . " woman be never to be entirely trust , -- the good of them . " i do not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment . " i shall be back in an hour or two , " i remark . " all right ! good luck ! but , i say , if you be cross the river you may as well return , for i do n't think it be at all likely that we shall have any use for him now . " i take our mongrel accordingly , and leave him , together with a , at the old naturalist be in . at i find a little weary after her night 's adventure , but very eager to hear the news . , too , be full of curiosity . i tell them all that we have do , suppress , however , the more dreadful part of the tragedy . thus , although i speak of 's death , i say nothing of the exact manner and method of it . with all my omission , however , there be enough to startle and amaze them . " it be a romance ! " cry . " an injured lady , half a million in treasure , a black cannibal , and a ruffian . they take the place of the conventional dragon or wicked earl . " " and two to the rescue , " add , with a bright glance at me . " why , , your fortune depend upon the issue of this search . i do n't think that you be nearly excite enough . just imagine what it must be to be so rich , and to have the world at your foot ! " it send a little thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she show no sign of elation at the prospect . on the contrary , she give a toss of her proud head , as though the matter be one in which she take small interest . " it be for that i be anxious , " she say . " nothing else be of any consequence ; but i think that he have behave most kindly and honorably throughout . it be our duty to clear him of this dreadful and unfounded charge . " it be evening before i leave , and quite dark by the time i reach home . my companion 's book and pipe lie by his chair , but he have disappear . i look about in the hope of see a note , but there be none . " i suppose that have go out , " i say to as she come up to lower the blind . " no , sir . he have go to his room , sir . do you know , sir , " sink her voice into an impressive whisper , " i be afraid for his health ? " " why so , ? " " well , he be that strange , sir . after you be go he walk and he walk , up and down , and up and down , until i be weary of the sound of his footstep . then i hear him talk to himself and mutter , and every time the bell ring out he come on the stairhead , with ' what be that , ? ' and now he have slam off to his room , but i can hear him walk away the same as ever . i hope he be not go to be ill , sir . i venture to say something to him about cool medicine , but he turn on me , sir , with such a look that i do n't know how ever i get out of the room . " " i do n't think that you have any cause to be uneasy , , " i answer . " i have see him like this before . he have some small matter upon his mind which make him restless . " i try to speak lightly to our worthy landlady , but i be myself somewhat uneasy when through the long night i still from time to time hear the dull sound of his tread , and know how his keen spirit be chafe against this involuntary inaction . at he look worn and haggard , with a little fleck of feverish color upon either cheek . " you be knock yourself up , old man , " i remark . " i hear you march about in the night . " " no , i could not sleep , " he answer . " this infernal problem be consume me . it be too much to be balk by so petty an obstacle , when all else have be overcome . i know the man , the launch , everything ; and yet i can get no news . i have set other agency at work , and use every means at my disposal . the whole river have be search on either side , but there be no news , nor have hear of her husband . i shall come to the conclusion soon that they have scuttle the craft . but there be objection to that . " " or that have put us on a wrong scent . " " no , i think that may be dismiss . i have inquiry make , and there be a launch of that description . " " could it have go up the river ? " " i have consider that possibility too , and there be a search-party who will work up as far as . if no news come , i shall start off myself , and go for the man rather than the boat . but surely , surely , we shall hear something . " we do not , however . not a word come to us either from or from the other agency . there be article in most of the paper upon the tragedy . they all appear to be rather hostile to the unfortunate . no fresh detail be to be find , however , in any of them , save that an inquest be to be hold upon the follow day . i walk over to in the evening to report our ill success to the lady , and on my return i find dejected and somewhat morose . he would hardly reply to my question , and busy himself all evening in an abstruse chemical analysis which involve much heating of retort and distil of vapor , end at last in a smell which fairly drive me out of the apartment . up to the small hour of the morning i could hear the clink of his test-tube which tell me that he be still engage in his malodorous experiment . in the early dawn i wake with a start , and be surprise to find him stand by my bedside , clad in a rude sailor dress with a pea-jacket , and a coarse red scarf round his neck . " i be off down the river , , " say he . " i have be turn it over in my mind , and i can see only one way out of it . it be worth try , at all event . " " surely i can come with you , then ? " say " no ; you can be much more useful if you will remain here as my representative . i be loath to go , for it be quite on the card that some message may come during the day , though be despondent about it last night . i want you to open all note and telegram , and to act on your own judgment if any news should come . can i rely upon you ? " " most certainly . " " i be afraid that you will not be able to wire to me , for i can hardly tell yet where i may find myself . if i be in luck , however , i may not be go so very long . i shall have news of some sort or other before i get back . " i have hear nothing of him by . on open the , however , i find that there be a fresh allusion to the business . " with reference to the tragedy , " it remark , " we have reason to believe that the matter promise to be even more complex and mysterious than be originally suppose . fresh evidence have show that it be quite impossible that could have be in any way concern in the matter . he and the housekeeper , , be both release yesterday evening . it be believe , however , that the police have a clue as to the real culprit , and that it be be prosecute by , of , with all his well-known energy and sagacity . further arrest may be expect at any moment . " " that be satisfactory so far as it go , " think " be safe , at any rate . i wonder what the fresh clue may be ; though it seem to be a stereotyped form whenever the police have make a blunder . " i toss the paper down upon the table , but at that moment my eye catch an advertisement in the agony column . it run in this way : " lose . -- , boatman , and his son , , leave 's at or about three o'clock last morning in the steam launch , black with two red stripe , funnel black with a white band , the sum of five pound will be pay to any one who can give information to , at 's , or at , as to the whereabouts of the say and the launch . " this be clearly be do . the address be enough to prove that . it strike me as rather ingenious , because it might be read by the fugitive without their see in it more than the natural anxiety of a wife for her missing husband . it be a long day . every time that a knock come to the door , or a sharp step pass in the street , i imagine that it be either return or an answer to his advertisement . i try to read , but my thought would wander off to our strange quest and to the ill-assorted and villainous pair whom we be pursue . could there be , i wonder , some radical flaw in my companion 's reasoning . might he be suffer from some huge self-deception ? be it not possible that his nimble and speculative mind have build up this wild theory upon faulty premise ? i have never know him to be wrong ; and yet the keen may occasionally be deceive . he be likely , i think , to fall into error through the of his logic , -- preference for a subtle and bizarre explanation when a plain and more commonplace one lie ready to his hand . yet , on the other hand , i have myself see the evidence , and i have hear the reason for his deduction . when i look back on the long chain of curious circumstance , many of them trivial in themselves , but all tend in the same direction , i could not disguise from myself that even if 's explanation be incorrect the true theory must be equally outre and startling . at three o'clock in the afternoon there be a loud peal at the bell , an authoritative voice in the hall , and , to my surprise , no less a person than be show up to me . very different be he , however , from the brusque and masterful professor of common sense who have take over the case so confidently at . his expression be downcast , and his bear meek and even apologetic . " , sir ; , " say he . " be out , i understand . " " yes , and i can be sure when he will be back . but perhaps you would care to wait . take that chair and try one of these cigar . " " thank you ; i do n't mind if i do , " say he , mop his face with a red bandanna handkerchief . " and a ? " " well , half a glass . it be very hot for the time of year ; and i have have a good deal to worry and try me . you know my theory about this case ? " " i remember that you express one . " " well , i have be oblige to reconsider it . i have my net draw tightly round , sir , when pop he go through a hole in the middle of it . he be able to prove an alibi which could not be shake . from the time that he leave his brother 's room he be never out of sight of some one or other . so it could not be he who climb over roof and through trap-door . it be a very dark case , and my professional credit be at stake . i should be very glad of a little assistance . " " we all need help sometimes , " say " your friend be a wonderful man , sir , " say he , in a husky and confidential voice . " he be a man who be not to be beat . i have know that young man go into a good many case , but i never see the case yet that he could not throw a light upon . he be irregular in his method , and a little quick perhaps in jump at theory , but , on the whole , i think he would have make a most promising officer , and i do n't care who know it . i have have a wire from him this morning , by which i understand that he have get some clue to this business . here be the message . " he take the telegram out of his pocket , and hand it to me . it be date from at twelve o'clock . " go to at once , " it say . " if i have not return , wait for me . i be close on the track of the gang . you can come with us if you want to be in at the finish . " " this sound well . he have evidently pick up the scent again , " say " ah , then he have be at fault too , " exclaim , with evident satisfaction . " even the good of us be throw off sometimes . of course this may prove to be a false alarm ; but it be my duty as an officer of the law to allow no chance to slip . but there be some one at the door . perhaps this be he . " a heavy step be hear ascend the stair , with a great wheeze and rattle as from a man who be sorely put to it for breath . once or twice he stop , as though the climb be too much for him , but at last he make his way to our door and enter . his appearance correspond to the sound which we have hear . he be an age man , clad in seafaring garb , with an old pea-jacket button up to his throat . his back be bow , his knee be shaky , and his breathing be painfully asthmatic . as he lean upon a thick oaken cudgel his shoulder heave in the effort to draw the air into his lung . he have a color scarf round his chin , and i could see little of his face save a pair of keen dark eye , overhang by bushy white brow , and long gray side-whiskers . altogether he give me the impression of a respectable master mariner who have fall into year and poverty . " what be it , my man ? " i ask . he look about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age . " be here ? " say he . " no ; but i be act for him . you can tell me any message you have for him . " " it be to him himself i be to tell it , " say he . " but i tell you that i be act for him . be it about 's boat ? " " yes . i know well where it be . an ' i know where the man he be after be . an ' i know where the treasure be . i know all about it . " " then tell me , and i shall let him know . " " it be to him i be to tell it , " he repeat , with the petulant obstinacy of a very old man . " well , you must wait for him . " " no , no ; i ai n't ' to lose a whole day to please no one . if ai n't here , then must find it all out for himself . i do n't care about the look of either of you , and i wo n't tell a word . " he shuffle towards the door , but get in front of him . " wait a bit , my friend , " say he . " you have important information , and you must not walk off . we shall keep you , whether you like or not , until our friend return . " the old man make a little run towards the door , but , as put his broad back up against it , he recognize the uselessness of resistance . " pretty sort o ' treatment this ! " he cry , stamp his stick . " i come here to see a gentleman , and you two , who i never see in my life , seize me and treat me in this fashion ! " " you will be none the bad , " i say . " we shall recompense you for the loss of your time . sit over here on the sofa , and you will not have long to wait . " he come across sullenly enough , and seat himself with his face rest on his hand . and i resume our cigar and our talk . suddenly , however , 's voice break in upon us . " i think that you might offer me a cigar too , " he say . we both start in our chair . there be sit close to us with an air of quiet amusement . " ! " i exclaim . " you here ! but where be the old man ? " " here be the old man , " say he , hold out a heap of white hair . " here he be , -- , whisker , eyebrow , and all . i think my disguise be pretty good , but i hardly expect that it would stand that test . " " ah , you rogue ! " cry , highly delight . " you would have make an actor , and a rare one . you have the proper workhouse cough , and those weak leg of yours be worth ten pound a week . i think i know the glint of your eye , though . you do n't get away from us so easily , you see . " " i have be work in that get-up all day , " say he , light his cigar . " you see , a good many of the criminal class begin to know me , -- since our friend here take to publish some of my case : so i can only go on the war-path under some simple disguise like this . you get my wire ? " " yes ; that be what bring me here . " " how have your case prosper ? " " it have all come to nothing . i have have to release two of my prisoner , and there be no evidence against the other two . " " never mind . we shall give you two other in the place of them . but you must put yourself under my order . you be welcome to all the official credit , but you must act on the line that i point out . be that agree ? " " entirely , if you will help me to the man . " " well , then , in the first place i shall want a fast steam be at the at seven o'clock . " " that be easily manage . there be always one about there ; but i can step across the road and telephone to make sure . " " then i shall want two stanch man , in case of resistance . " " there will be two or three in the boat . what else ? " " when we secure the man we shall get the treasure . i think that it would be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box round to the young lady to whom half of it rightfully belong . let her be the first to open it . -- , ? " " it would be a great pleasure to me . " " rather an irregular proceeding , " say , shake his head . " however , the whole thing be irregular , and i suppose we must wink at it . the treasure must afterwards be hand over to the authority until after the official investigation . " " certainly . that be easily manage . one other point . i should much like to have a few detail about this matter from the lip of himself . you know i like to work the detail of my case out . there be no objection to my have an unofficial interview with him , either here in my room or elsewhere , as long as he be efficiently guard ? " " well , you be master of the situation . i have have no proof yet of the existence of this . however , if you can catch him i do n't see how i can refuse you an interview with him . " " that be understand , then ? " " perfectly . be there anything else ? " " only that i insist upon your dining with us . it will be ready in half an hour . i have oyster and a brace of grouse , with something a little choice in white wine . -- , you have never yet recognize my merit as a housekeeper . " our meal be a merry one . could talk exceedingly well when he choose , and that night he do choose . he appear to be in a state of nervous exaltation . i have never know him so brilliant . he speak on a quick succession of subject , -- , on medieval pottery , on stradivarius violin , on the buddhism of , and on the of the future , -- each as though he have make a special study of it . his bright humor mark the reaction from his black depression of the preceding day . prove to be a sociable soul in his hour of relaxation , and face his dinner with the air of a vivant . for myself , i feel elate at the thought that we be near the end of our task , and i catch something of 's gaiety . none of us allude during dinner to the cause which have bring us together . when the cloth be clear , glance at his watch , and fill up three glass with port . " one bumper , " say he , " to the success of our little expedition . and now it be high time we be off . have you a pistol , ? " " i have my old in my desk . " " you have well take it , then . it be well to be prepare . i see that the cab be at the door . i order it for six . " it be a little past seven before we reach the wharf , and find our launch await us . eye it critically . " be there anything to mark it as a ? " " yes , -- green lamp at the side . " " then take it off . " the small change be make , we step on board , and the rope be cast off . , , and i sit in the stern . there be one man at the rudder , one to tend the engine , and two burly forward . " where to ? " ask . " to the . tell them to stop opposite 's . " our craft be evidently a very fast one . we shoot past the long line of loaded barge as though they be stationary . smile with satisfaction as we overhaul a river steamer and leave her behind us . " we ought to be able to catch anything on the river , " he say . " well , hardly that . but there be not many launch to beat us . " " we shall have to catch the , and she have a name for be a clipper . i will tell you how the land lie , . you recollect how annoyed i be at be balk by so small a thing ? " " yes . " " well , i give my mind a thorough rest by plunge into a chemical analysis . one of our great statesman have say that a change of work be the good rest . so it be . when i have succeed in dissolve the hydrocarbon which i be at work at , i come back to our problem of the , and think the whole matter out again . my boy have be up the river and down the river without result . the launch be not at any landing-stage or wharf , nor have it return . yet it could hardly have be scuttle to hide their trace , -- that always remain as a possible hypothesis if all else fail . i know this man have a certain degree of low cunning , but i do not think him capable of anything in the nature of delicate finesse . that be usually a product of high education . i then reflect that since he have certainly be in some we have evidence that he maintain a continual watch over could hardly leave at a moment 's notice , but would need some little time , if it be only a day , to arrange his affair . that be the balance of probability , at any rate . " " it seem to me to be a little weak , " say " it be more probable that he have arrange his affair before ever he set out upon his expedition . " " no , i hardly think so . this lair of his would be too valuable a retreat in case of need for him to give it up until he be sure that he could do without it . but a second consideration strike me . must have feel that the peculiar appearance of his companion , however much he may have him , would give rise to gossip , and possibly be associate with this tragedy . he be quite sharp enough to see that . they have start from their under cover of darkness , and he would wish to get back before it be broad light . now , it be past three o'clock , accord to , when they get the boat . it would be quite bright , and people would be about in an hour or so . therefore , i argue , they do not go very far . they pay well to hold his tongue , reserve his launch for the final escape , and hurry to their lodging with the . in a couple of night , when they have time to see what view the paper take , and whether there be any suspicion , they would make their way under cover of darkness to some ship at or in the , where no doubt they have already arrange for passage to or the . " " but the launch ? they could not have take that to their lodging . " " quite so . i argue that the launch must be no great way off , in spite of its invisibility . i then put myself in the place of , and look at it as a man of his capacity would . he would probably consider that to send back the launch or to keep it at a wharf would make pursuit easy if the police do happen to get on his track . how , then , could he conceal the launch and yet have her at hand when want ? i wonder what i should do myself if i be in his shoe . i could only think of one way of do it . i might land the launch over to some or repairer , with direction to make a trifling change in her . she would then be remove to his shed or yard , and so be effectually conceal , while at the same time i could have her at a few hour ' notice . " " that seem simple enough . " " it be just these very simple thing which be extremely liable to be overlook . however , i determine to act on the idea . i start at once in this harmless seaman 's rig and inquire at all the yard down the river . i draw blank at fifteen , but at the learn that the have be hand over to them two day ago by a man , with some trivial direction as to her rudder . ' there ai n't naught amiss with her rudder , ' say the foreman . ' there she lie , with the red streak . ' at that moment who should come down but , the missing owner ? he be rather the bad for liquor . i should not , of course , have know him , but he bellow out his name and the name of his launch . ' i want her at eight o'clock , ' say he , -- o'clock sharp , mind , for i have two gentleman who wo n't be keep wait . ' they have evidently pay him well , for he be very flush of money , chuck shilling about to the man . i follow him some distance , but he subside into an ale-house : so i go back to the yard , and , happen to pick up one of my boy on the way , i station him as a sentry over the launch . he be to stand at water 's edge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start . we shall be lie off in the stream , and it will be a strange thing if we do not take man , treasure , and all . " " you have plan it all very neatly , whether they be the right man or not , " say ; " but if the affair be in my hand i should have have a body of police in 's , and arrest them when they come down . " " which would have be never . this man be a pretty shrewd fellow . he would send a scout on ahead , and if anything make him suspicious lie snug for another week . " " but you might have stick to , and so be lead to their hiding-place , " say " in that case i should have waste my day . i think that it be a hundred to one against know where they live . as long as he have liquor and good pay , why should he ask question ? they send him message what to do . no , i think over every possible course , and this be the good . " while this conversation have be proceed , we have be shoot the long series of bridge which span the . as we pass the the last ray of the sun be gild the cross upon the summit of 's . it be twilight before we reach the . " that be 's , " say , point to a bristle of mast and rig on the side . " gently up and down here under cover of this string of lighter . " he take a pair of from his pocket and gaze some time at the shore . " i see my sentry at his post , " he remark , " but no sign of a handkerchief . " " suppose we go a short way and lie in wait for them , " say , eagerly . we be all eager by this time , even the policeman and stoker , who have a very vague idea of what be go forward . " we have no right to take anything for grant , " answer . " it be certainly ten to one that they go , but we can be certain . from this point we can see the entrance of the yard , and they can hardly see us . it will be a clear night and plenty of light . we must stay where we be . see how the folk swarm over yonder in the gaslight . " " they be come from work in the yard . " " rascal , but i suppose every one have some little immortal spark conceal about him . you would not think it , to look at them . there be no a priori probability about it . a strange enigma be man ! " " some one call him a soul conceal in an animal , " i suggest . " be good upon the subject , " say . " he remark that , while the individual man be an insoluble puzzle , in the aggregate he become a mathematical certainty . you can , for example , never foretell what any one man will do , but you can say with precision what an average number will be up to . individual vary , but percentage remain constant . so say the statistician . but do i see a handkerchief ? surely there be a white flutter over yonder . " " yes , it be your boy , " i cry . " i can see him plainly . " " and there be the , " exclaim , " and go like the devil ! full speed ahead , engineer . make after that launch with the yellow light . by heaven , i shall never forgive myself if she prove to have the heel of us ! " she have slip unseen through the and pass behind two or three small craft , so that she have fairly get her speed up before we see her . now she be fly down the stream , near in to the shore , go at a tremendous rate . look gravely at her and shake his head . " she be very fast , " he say . " i doubt if we shall catch her . " " we catch her ! " cry , between his tooth . " heap it on , stoker ! make her do all she can ! if we burn the boat we must have them ! " we be fairly after her now . the furnace roar , and the powerful engine whizz and clank , like a great metallic heart . her sharp , steep prow cut through the and send two rolling wave to right and to left of us . with every throb of the engine we spring and quiver like a live thing . one great yellow lantern in our bow throw a long , flicker funnel of light in front of us . right ahead a dark blur upon the water show where the lie , and the swirl of white foam behind her speak of the pace at which she be go . we flash past barge , steamer , , in and out , behind this one and round the other . voice hail us out of the darkness , but still the thunder on , and still we follow close upon her track . " pile it on , man , pile it on ! " cry , look down into the , while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager , aquiline face . " get every pound of steam you can . " " i think we gain a little , " say , with his eye on the . " i be sure of it , " say " we shall be up with her in a very few minute . " at that moment , however , as our evil fate would have it , a tug with three barge in tow blunder in between us . it be only by put our helm hard down that we avoid a collision , and before we could round them and recover our way the have gain a good two hundred yard . she be still , however , well in view , and the murky uncertain twilight be set into a clear starlit night . our boiler be strain to their utmost , and the frail shell vibrate and creak with the fierce energy which be drive us along . we have shoot through the pool , past the , down the long , and up again after round the of . the dull blur in front of us resolve itself now clearly enough into the dainty . turn our upon her , so that we could plainly see the figure upon her deck . one man sit by the stern , with something black between his knee over which he stoop . beside him lie a dark mass which look like a dog . the boy hold the tiller , while against the red glare of the furnace i could see old , strip to the waist , and shovel coal for dear life . they may have have some doubt at first as to whether we be really pursue them , but now as we follow every wind and turn which they take there could no longer be any question about it . at we be about three hundred pace behind them . at we could not have be more than two hundred and fifty . i have course many creature in many country during my checker career , but never do sport give me such a wild thrill as this mad , fly down the . steadily we draw in upon them , yard by yard . in the silence of the night we could hear the pant and clank of their machinery . the man in the stern still crouch upon the deck , and his arm be move as though he be busy , while every now and then he would look up and measure with a glance the distance which still separate us . near we come and near . yell to them to stop . we be not more than four boat 's length behind them , both boat fly at a tremendous pace . it be a clear reach of the river , with upon one side and the melancholy upon the other . at our hail the man in the stern spring up from the deck and shake his two clinch fist at us , curse the while in a high , cracked voice . he be a good-sized , powerful man , and as he stand poise himself with leg astride i could see that from the thigh downwards there be but a wooden stump upon the right side . at the sound of his strident , angry cry there be movement in the huddle bundle upon the deck . it straighten itself into a little black small i have ever a great , misshapen head and a shock of tangled , dishevelled hair . have already draw his revolver , and i whip out mine at the sight of this savage , distorted creature . he be wrap in some sort of dark ulster or blanket , which leave only his face expose ; but that face be enough to give a man a sleepless night . never have i see feature so deeply mark with all bestiality and cruelty . his small eye glow and burn with a sombre light , and his thick lip be writhe back from his tooth , which grin and chatter at us with a half animal fury . " fire if he raise his hand , " say , quietly . we be within a by this time , and almost within touch of our quarry . i can see the two of them now as they stand , the white man with his leg far apart , shriek out curse , and the unhallowed dwarf with his hideous face , and his strong yellow tooth gnash at us in the light of our lantern . it be well that we have so clear a view of him . even as we look he pluck out from under his cover a short , round piece of wood , like a , and clap it to his lip . our pistol ring out together . he whirl round , throw up his arm , and with a kind of choke cough fall sideways into the stream . i catch one glimpse of his venomous , menace eye amid the white swirl of the water . at the same moment the man throw himself upon the rudder and put it hard down , so that his boat make straight in for the southern bank , while we shoot past her stern , only clear her by a few foot . we be round after her in an instant , but she be already nearly at the bank . it be a wild and desolate place , where the moon glimmer upon a wide expanse of , with pool of stagnant water and bed of decay vegetation . the launch with a dull thud run up upon the , with her bow in the air and her stern flush with the water . the fugitive spring out , but his stump instantly sink its whole length into the sodden soil . in vain he struggle and writhe . not one step could he possibly take either forwards or backwards . he yell in impotent rage , and kick frantically into the mud with his other foot , but his struggle only bore his wooden pin the deep into the sticky bank . when we bring our launch alongside he be so firmly anchor that it be only by throw the end of a rope over his shoulder that we be able to haul him out , and to drag him , like some evil fish , over our side . the two smith , father and son , sit sullenly in their launch , but come aboard meekly enough when command . the herself we haul off and make fast to our stern . a solid iron chest of indian workmanship stand upon the deck . this , there could be no question , be the same that have contain the ill-omened treasure of the . there be no key , but it be of considerable weight , so we transfer it carefully to our own little cabin . as we steam slowly again , we flash our in every direction , but there be no sign of the . somewhere in the dark ooze at the bottom of the lie the bone of that strange visitor to our shore . " see here , " say , point to the wooden hatchway . " we be hardly quick enough with our pistol . " there , sure enough , just behind where we have be stand , stick one of those murderous dart which we know so well . it must have whizz between us at the instant that we fire . smile at it and shrug his shoulder in his easy fashion , but i confess that it turn me sick to think of the horrible death which have pass so close to us that night . our captive sit in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he have do so much and wait so long to gain . he be a sunburned , fellow , with a of line and wrinkle all over his mahogany feature , which tell of a hard , open-air life . there be a singular prominence about his bearded chin which mark a man who be not to be easily turn from his purpose . his age may have be fifty or thereabouts , for his black , curly hair be thickly shoot with gray . his face in repose be not an one , though his heavy brow and aggressive chin give him , as i have lately see , a terrible expression when move to anger . he sit now with his handcuff hand upon his lap , and his head sink upon his breast , while he look with his keen , twinkle eye at the box which have be the cause of his . it seem to me that there be more sorrow than anger in his rigid and contain countenance . once he look up at me with a gleam of something like humor in his eye . " well , , " say , light a cigar , " i be sorry that it have come to this . " " and so be i , sir , " he answer , frankly . " i do n't believe that i can swing over the job . i give you my word on the book that i never raise hand against . it be that little who shoot one of his cursed darts into him . i have no part in it , sir . i be as grieve as if it have be my blood-relation . i welt the little devil with the slack end of the rope for it , but it be do , and i could not undo it again . " " have a cigar , " say ; " and you have well take a pull out of my flask , for you be very wet . how could you expect so small and weak a man as this black fellow to overpower and hold him while you be climb the rope ? " " you seem to know as much about it as if you be there , sir . the truth be that i hope to find the room clear . i know the habit of the house pretty well , and it be the time when usually go down to his supper . i shall make no secret of the business . the good defence that i can make be just the simple truth . now , if it have be the old major i would have swing for him with a light heart . i would have think no more of knife him than of smoke this cigar . but it be curse hard that i should be lag over this young , with whom i have no quarrel whatever . " " you be under the charge of , of . he be go to bring you up to my room , and i shall ask you for a true account of the matter . you must make a clean breast of it , for if you do i hope that i may be of use to you . i think i can prove that the poison act so quickly that the man be dead before ever you reach the room . " " that he be , sir . i never get such a turn in my life as when i see him grin at me with his head on his shoulder as i climb through the window . it fairly shake me , sir . i will have half kill for it if he have not scramble off . that be how he come to leave his club , and some of his dart too , as he tell me , which i dare say help to put you on our track ; though how you keep on it be more than i can tell . i do n't feel no malice against you for it . but it do seem a queer thing , " he add , with a bitter smile , " that i who have a fair claim to nigh upon half a million of money should spend the first half of my life build a breakwater in the , and be like to spend the other half dig drain at . it be an evil day for me when first i clap eye upon the merchant and have to do with the treasure , which never bring anything but a curse yet upon the man who own it . to him it bring murder , to it bring fear and guilt , to me it have mean slavery for life . " at this moment thrust his broad face and heavy shoulder into the tiny cabin . " quite a family party , " he remark . " i think i shall have a pull at that flask , . well , i think we may all congratulate each other . pity we do n't take the other alive ; but there be no choice . i say , , you must confess that you cut it rather fine . it be all we could do to overhaul her . " " all be well that end well , " say . " but i certainly do not know that the be such a clipper . " " say she be one of the fast launch on the river , and that if he have have another man to help him with the engine we should never have catch her . he swear he know nothing of this business . " " neither he do , " cry our prisoner , -- a word . i choose his launch because i hear that she be a flier . we tell him nothing , but we pay him well , and he be to get something handsome if we reach our vessel , the esmeralda , at , outward bind for the . " " well , if he have do no wrong we shall see that no wrong come to him . if we be pretty quick in catch our man , we be not so quick in condemn them . " it be amusing to notice how the consequential be already begin to give himself air on the strength of the capture . from the slight smile which play over 's face , i could see that the speech have not be lose upon him . " we will be at presently , " say , " and shall land you , , with the . i need hardly tell you that i be take a very grave responsibility upon myself in do this . it be most irregular ; but of course an agreement be an agreement . i must , however , as a matter of duty , send an inspector with you , since you have so valuable a charge . you will drive , no doubt ? " " yes , i shall drive . " " it be a pity there be no key , that we may make an inventory first . you will have to break it open . where be the key , my man ? " " at the bottom of the river , " say , shortly . " hum ! there be no use your give this unnecessary trouble . we have have work enough already through you . however , doctor , i need not warn you to be careful . bring the box back with you to the room . you will find us there , on our way to the station . " they land me at , with my heavy iron box , and with a bluff , genial inspector as my companion . a quarter of an hour 's drive bring us to 's . the servant seem surprise at so late a visitor . be out for the evening , she explain , and likely to be very late . , however , be in the drawing-room : so to the drawing-room i go , box in hand , leave the obliging inspector in the cab . she be seat by the open window , dress in some sort of white diaphanous material , with a little touch of scarlet at the neck and waist . the soft light of a shaded lamp fall upon her as she lean back in the basket chair , play over her sweet , grave face , and tint with a dull , metallic sparkle the rich coil of her luxuriant hair . one white arm and hand droop over the side of the chair , and her whole pose and figure speak of an absorbing melancholy . at the sound of my she spring to her foot , however , and a bright flush of surprise and of pleasure color her pale cheek . " i hear a cab drive up , " she say . " i think that have come back very early , but i never dream that it might be you . what news have you bring me ? " " i have bring something good than news , " say i , put down the box upon the table and speak jovially and boisterously , though my heart be heavy within me . " i have bring you something which be worth all the news in the world . i have bring you a fortune . " she glance at the iron box . " be that the treasure , then ? " she ask , coolly enough . " yes , this be the great treasure . half of it be yours and half be 's . you will have a couple of hundred thousand each . think of that ! an annuity of ten thousand pound . there will be few rich young lady in . be it not glorious ? " i think that i must have be rather overact my delight , and that she detect a hollow ring in my congratulation , for i see her eyebrow rise a little , and she glance at me curiously . " if i have it , " say she , " i owe it to you . " " no , no , " i answer , " not to me , but to my friend . with all the will in the world , i could never have follow up a clue which have tax even his analytical genius . as it be , we very nearly lose it at the last moment . " " pray sit down and tell me all about it , , " say she . i narrate briefly what have occur since i have see her last , -- 's new method of search , the discovery of the , the appearance of , our expedition in the evening , and the wild chase down the . she listen with parted lip and shine eye to my recital of our adventure . when i speak of the dart which have so narrowly miss us , she turn so white that i fear that she be about to faint . " it be nothing , " she say , as i hasten to pour her out some water . " i be all right again . it be a shock to me to hear that i have place my friend in such horrible peril . " " that be all over , " i answer . " it be nothing . i will tell you no more gloomy detail . let us turn to something bright . there be the treasure . what could be bright than that ? i get leave to bring it with me , think that it would interest you to be the first to see it . " " it would be of the great interest to me , " she say . there be no eagerness in her voice , however . it have strike her , doubtless , that it might seem ungracious upon her part to be indifferent to a prise which have cost so much to win . " what a pretty box ! " she say , stoop over it . " this be indian work , i suppose ? " " yes ; it be metal-work . " " and so heavy ! " she exclaim , try to raise it . " the box alone must be of some value . where be the key ? " " throw it into the , " i answer . " i must borrow 's poker . " there be in the front a thick and broad hasp , wrought in the image of a sit . under this i thrust the end of the poker and twist it outward as a lever . the hasp spring open with a loud snap . with tremble finger i fling back the lid . we both stand gaze in astonishment . the box be empty ! no wonder that it be heavy . the be two-thirds of an inch thick all round . it be massive , well make , and solid , like a chest construct to carry thing of great price , but not one shred or crumb of metal or jewelry lie within it . it be absolutely and completely empty . " the treasure be lose , " say , calmly . as i listen to the word and realize what they mean , a great shadow seem to pass from my soul . i do not know how this treasure have weigh me down , until now that it be finally remove . it be selfish , no doubt , disloyal , wrong , but i could realize nothing save that the golden barrier be go from between us . " thank ! " i ejaculate from my very heart . she look at me with a quick , questioning smile . " why do you say that ? " she ask . " because you be within my reach again , " i say , take her hand . she do not withdraw it . " because i love you , , as truly as ever a man love a woman . because this treasure , these riches , seal my lip . now that they be go i can tell you how i love you . that be why i say , ' thank . ' " " then i say , ' thank , ' too , " she whisper , as i draw her to my side . whoever have lose a treasure , i know that night that i have gain one . a very patient man be that inspector in the cab , for it be a weary time before i rejoin him . his face cloud over when i show him the empty box . " there go the reward ! " say he , gloomily . " where there be no money there be no pay . this night 's work would have be worth a tenner each to and me if the treasure have be there . " " be a rich man , " i say . " he will see that you be reward , treasure or no . " the inspector shake his head despondently , however . " it be a bad job , " he repeat ; " and so will think . " his forecast prove to be correct , for the detective look blank enough when i get to and show him the empty box . they have only just arrive , , the prisoner , and he , for they have change their plan so far as to report themselves at a station upon the way . my companion lounge in his with his usual listless expression , while sit stolidly opposite to him with his wooden leg cock over his sound one . as i exhibit the empty box he lean back in his chair and laugh aloud . " this be your doing , , " say , angrily . " yes , i have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it , " he cry , exultantly . " it be my treasure ; and if i ca n't have the loot i will take darned good care that no one else do . i tell you that no living man have any right to it , unless it be three man who be in the and myself . i know now that i can have the use of it , and i know that they can . i have act all through for them as much as for myself . it have be the sign of four with us always . well i know that they would have have me do just what i have do , and throw the treasure into the rather than let it go to kith or kin of or of . it be not to make them rich that we do for . you will find the treasure where the key be , and where little be . when i see that your launch must catch us , i put the loot away in a safe place . there be no rupee for you this journey . " " you be deceive us , small , " say , sternly . " if you have wish to throw the treasure into the it would have be easy for you to have throw box and all . " " easy for me to throw , and easy for you to recover , " he answer , with a shrewd , sidelong look . " the man that be clever enough to hunt me down be clever enough to pick an iron box from the bottom of a river . now that they be scatter over five mile or so , it may be a hard job . it go to my heart to do it , though . i be half mad when you come up with us . however , there be no good grieve over it . i have have up in my life , and i have have down , but i have learn not to cry over spill milk . " " this be a very serious matter , , " say the detective . " if you have help justice , instead of thwart it in this way , you would have have a good chance at your trial . " " ! " snarl the ex-convict . " a pretty justice ! whose loot be this , if it be not ours ? where be the justice that i should give it up to those who have never earn it ? look how i have earn it ! twenty long year in that swamp , all day at work under the , all night chain up in the filthy , bite by mosquito , rack with ague , bully by every cursed policeman who love to take it out of a white man . that be how i earn the treasure ; and you talk to me of justice because i can bear to feel that i have pay this price only that another may enjoy it ! i would rather swing a score of time , or have one of 's darts in my hide , than live in a convict 's cell and feel that another man be at his ease in a palace with the money that should be mine . " have drop his mask of stoicism , and all this come out in a wild whirl of word , while his eye blaze , and the handcuff clank together with the impassioned movement of his hand . i could understand , as i see the fury and the passion of the man , that it be no groundless or unnatural terror which have possess when he first learn that the injured convict be upon his track . " you forget that we know nothing of all this , " say quietly . " we have not hear your story , and we can tell how far justice may originally have be on your side . " " well , sir , you have be very fair-spoken to me , though i can see that i have you to thank that i have these bracelets upon my wrist . still , i bear no grudge for that . it be all fair and above-board . if you want to hear my story i have no wish to hold it back . what i say to you be 's truth , every word of it . thank you ; you can put the glass beside me here , and i will put my lip to it if i be dry . " i be a man myself , -- near . i dare say you would find a heap of live there now if you be to look . i have often think of take a look round there , but the truth be that i be never much of a credit to the family , and i doubt if they would be so very glad to see me . they be all steady , folk , small farmer , well know and respect over the , while i be always a bit of a rover . at last , however , when i be about eighteen , i give them no more trouble , for i get into a mess over a girl , and could only get out of it again by take the queen 's shilling and join the buff , which be just start for . " i be n't destine to do much soldier , however . i have just get past the goose-step , and learn to handle my musket , when i be fool enough to go swimming in the gange . luckily for me , my company sergeant , , be in the water at the same time , and he be one of the fine swimmer in the service . a crocodile take me , just as i be half-way across , and nip off my right leg as clean as a surgeon could have do it , just above the knee . what with the shock and the loss of blood , i faint , and should have drown if have not catch hold of me and paddle for the bank . i be five month in hospital over it , and when at last i be able to limp out of it with this timber toe strap to my stump i find myself invalid out of the army and unfit for any active occupation . " i be , as you can imagine , pretty down on my luck at this time , for i be a useless cripple though not yet in my twentieth year . however , my misfortune soon prove to be a blessing in disguise . a man name , who have come out there as an , want an overseer to look after his coolie and keep them up to their work . he happen to be a friend of our colonel be , who have take an interest in me since the accident . to make a long story short , the colonel recommend me strongly for the post and , as the work be mostly to be do on horseback , my leg be no great obstacle , for i have enough knee leave to keep good grip on the saddle . what i have to do be to ride over the plantation , to keep an eye on the man as they work , and to report the idler . the pay be fair , i have comfortable quarter , and altogether i be content to spend the remainder of my life in . be a kind man , and he would often drop into my little shanty and smoke a pipe with me , for white folk out there feel their heart warm to each other as they never do here at home . " well , i be never in luck 's way long . suddenly , without a note of warning , the great mutiny break upon us . one month lie as still and peaceful , to all appearance , as or ; the next there be two hundred thousand black devil let loose , and the country be a perfect hell . of course you know all about it , gentleman , -- deal more than i do , very like , since reading be not in my line . i only know what i see with my own eye . our plantation be at a place call , near the border of the . night after night the whole sky be alight with the burning bungalow , and day after day we have small company of european pass through our estate with their wife and child , on their way to , where be the near troop . be an obstinate man . he have it in his head that the affair have be exaggerate , and that it would blow over as suddenly as it have spring up . there he sit on his veranda , drink and smoking cheroot , while the country be in a blaze about him . of course we stick by him , i and , who , with his wife , use to do the and the managing . well , one fine day the crash come . i have be away on a distant plantation , and be ride slowly home in the evening , when my eye fall upon something all huddle together at the bottom of a steep nullah . i ride down to see what it be , and the cold strike through my heart when i find it be 's wife , all cut into ribbon , and half eat by jackal and native dog . a little further up the road himself be lie on his face , quite dead , with an empty revolver in his hand and four sepoy lie across each other in front of him . i rein up my horse , wonder which way i should turn , but at that moment i see thick smoke curl up from 's bungalow and the flame begin to burst through the roof . i know then that i could do my employer no good , but would only throw my own life away if i meddle in the matter . from where i stand i could see hundred of the black fiend , with their red coat still on their back , dance and howl round the burning house . some of them point at me , and a couple of bullet sing past my head ; so i break away across the paddy-field , and find myself late at night safe within the wall at . " as it prove , however , there be no great safety there , either . the whole country be up like a swarm of bee . wherever the could collect in little band they hold just the ground that their gun command . everywhere else they be helpless fugitive . it be a fight of the million against the hundred ; and the cruel part of it be that these man that we fight against , foot , horse , and gunner , be our own pick troop , whom we have teach and train , handle our own weapon , and blow our own . at there be the , some sikh , two troop of horse , and a battery of artillery . a volunteer corps of clerk and merchant have be form , and this i join , wooden leg and all . we go out to meet the rebel at early in , and we beat them back for a time , but our powder give out , and we have to fall back upon the city . nothing but the bad news come to us from every side , -- be not to be wonder at , for if you look at the map you will see that we be right in the heart of it . be rather good than a hundred mile to the east , and about as far to the south . from every point on the compass there be nothing but torture and murder and outrage . " the city of be a great place , swarm with fanatic and fierce of all sort . our handful of man be lose among the narrow , wind street . our leader move across the river , therefore , and take up his position in the old fort at . i do n't know if any of you gentleman have ever read or hear anything of that old fort . it be a very queer place , -- queer that ever i be in , and i have be in some rum corner , too . first of all , it be enormous in size . i should think that the enclosure must be acre and acre . there be a modern part , which take all our garrison , woman , child , store , and everything else , with plenty of room over . but the modern part be nothing like the size of the old quarter , where nobody go , and which be give over to the scorpion and the centipede . it be all full of great desert hall , and wind passage , and long corridor twist in and out , so that it be easy enough for folk to get lose in it . for this reason it be seldom that any one go into it , though now and again a party with torch might go explore . " the river wash along the front of the old fort , and so protect it , but on the side and behind there be many door , and these have to be guard , of course , in the old quarter as well as in that which be actually hold by our troop . we be short-handed , with hardly man enough to man the angle of the building and to serve the gun . it be impossible for us , therefore , to station a strong guard at every one of the innumerable gate . what we do be to organize a central in the middle of the fort , and to leave each gate under the charge of one white man and two or three native . i be select to take charge during certain hour of the night of a small isolated door upon the southwest side of the building . two sikh trooper be place under my command , and i be instruct if anything go wrong to fire my musket , when i might rely upon help come at once from the central guard . as the guard be a good two hundred pace away , however , and as the space between be cut up into a labyrinth of passage and corridor , i have great doubt as to whether they could arrive in time to be of any use in case of an actual attack . " well , i be pretty proud at have this small command give me , since i be a raw recruit , and a one at that . for two night i keep the watch with my . they be tall , fierce-looking chap , and by name , both old who have bear arm against us at . they could talk english pretty well , but i could get little out of them . they prefer to stand together and jabber all night in their queer sikh lingo . for myself , i use to stand outside the , look down on the broad , wind river and on the twinkle light of the great city . the beating of drum , the rattle of tomtom , and the yell and howl of the rebel , drink with opium and with bang , be enough to remind us all night of our dangerous neighbor across the stream . every two hour the officer of the night use to come round to all the post , to make sure that all be well . " the third night of my watch be dark and dirty , with a small , drive rain . it be dreary work standing in the hour after hour in such weather . i try again and again to make my sikh talk , but without much success . at two in the morning the round pass , and break for a moment the weariness of the night . find that my companion would not be lead into conversation , i take out my pipe , and lay down my musket to strike the match . in an instant the two sikh be upon me . one of them snatch my firelock up and level it at my head , while the other hold a great knife to my throat and swear between his tooth that he would plunge it into me if i move a step . " my first thought be that these fellow be in league with the rebel , and that this be the beginning of an assault . if our door be in the hand of the the place must fall , and the woman and child be treat as they be in . maybe you gentleman think that i be just make out a case for myself , but i give you my word that when i think of that , though i feel the point of the knife at my throat , i open my mouth with the intention of give a scream , if it be my last one , which might alarm the main guard . the man who hold me seem to know my thought ; for , even as i brace myself to it , he whisper , ' do n't make a noise . the fort be safe enough . there be no rebel dog on this side of the river . ' there be the ring of truth in what he say , and i know that if i raise my voice i be a dead man . i could read it in the fellow 's brown eye . i wait , therefore , in silence , to see what it be that they want from me . " ' to me , , ' say the tall and fierce of the pair , the one whom they call . ' you must either be with us now or you must be silence forever . the thing be too great a one for us to hesitate . either you be heart and soul with us on your oath on the cross of the christian , or your body this night shall be throw into the ditch and we shall pass over to our brother in the rebel army . there be no middle way . which be it to be , death or life ? we can only give you three minute to decide , for the time be pass , and all must be do before the round come again . ' " ' how can i decide ? ' say ' you have not tell me what you want of me . but i tell you now that if it be anything against the safety of the fort i will have no truck with it , so you can drive home your knife and welcome . ' " ' it be nothing against the fort , ' say he . ' we only ask you to do that which your countryman come to this land for . we ask you to be rich . if you will be one of us this night , we will swear to you upon the naked knife , and by the threefold oath which no sikh be ever know to break , that you shall have your fair share of the loot . a quarter of the treasure shall be yours . we can say no fair . ' " ' but what be the treasure , then ? ' i ask . ' i be as ready to be rich as you can be , if you will but show me how it can be do . ' " ' you will swear , then , ' say he , ' by the bone of your father , by the honor of your mother , by the cross of your faith , to raise no hand and speak no word against us , either now or afterwards ? ' " ' i will swear it , ' i answer , ' provide that the fort be not endanger . ' " ' then my comrade and i will swear that you shall have a quarter of the treasure which shall be equally divide among the four of us . ' " ' there be but three , ' say " ' no ; must have his share . we can tell the tale to you while we await them . do you stand at the gate , , and give notice of their come . the thing stand thus , , and i tell it to you because i know that an oath be bind upon a , and that we may trust you . have you be a lie hindoo , though you have swear by all the god in their false temple , your blood would have be upon the knife , and your body in the water . but the sikh know the englishman , and the englishman know the sikh . hearken , then , to what i have to say . " ' there be a rajah in the northern province who have much wealth , though his land be small . much have come to him from his father , and more still he have set by himself , for he be of a low nature and hoard his gold rather than spend it . when the trouble break out he would be friend both with the lion and the tiger , -- the and with the company 's . soon , however , it seem to him that the white man 's day be come , for through all the land he could hear of nothing but of their death and their overthrow . yet , be a careful man , he make such plan that , come what might , half at least of his treasure should be leave to him . that which be in gold and silver he keep by him in the vault of his palace , but the most precious stone and the choicest pearl that he have he put in an iron box , and send it by a trusty servant who , under the guise of a merchant , should take it to the fort at , there to lie until the land be at peace . thus , if the rebel win he would have his money , but if the company conquer his jewel would be save to him . have thus divide his hoard , he throw himself into the cause of the , since they be strong upon his border . by do this , mark you , , his property become the due of those who have be true to their salt . " ' this pretend merchant , who travel under the name of , be now in the city of , and desire to gain his way into the fort . he have with him as my foster-brother , who know his secret . have promise this night to lead him to a of the fort , and have choose this one for his purpose . here he will come presently , and here he will find and myself await him . the place be lonely , and none shall know of his come . the world shall know of the merchant no more , but the great treasure of the rajah shall be divide among us . what say you to it , ? ' " in the life of a man seem a great and a sacred thing ; but it be very different when there be fire and blood all round you and you have be use to meeting death at every turn . whether the merchant live or die be a thing as light as air to me , but at the talk about the treasure my heart turn to it , and i think of what i might do in the old country with it , and how my folk would stare when they see their ne'er-do-well come back with his pocket full of gold moidore . i have , therefore , already make up my mind . , however , think that i hesitate , press the matter more closely . " ' consider , , ' say he , ' that if this man be take by the commandant he will be hang or shoot , and his jewel take by the government , so that no man will be a rupee the good for them . now , since we do the take of him , why should we not do the rest as well ? the jewel will be as well with us as in the company 's coffer . there will be enough to make every one of us rich man and great chief . no one can know about the matter , for here we be cut off from all man . what could be good for the purpose ? say again , then , , whether you be with us , or if we must look upon you as an enemy . ' " ' i be with you heart and soul , ' say " ' it be well , ' he answer , hand me back my firelock . ' you see that we trust you , for your word , like ours , be not to be break . we have now only to wait for my brother and the merchant . ' " ' do your brother know , then , of what you will do ? ' i ask . " ' the plan be his . he have devise it . we will go to the gate and share the watch with . ' " the rain be still fall steadily , for it be just the beginning of the wet season . , heavy cloud be drift across the sky , and it be hard to see more than a . a deep moat lie in front of our door , but the water be in place nearly dry up , and it could easily be cross . it be strange to me to be stand there with those two wild wait for the man who be come to his death . " suddenly my eye catch the glint of a shaded lantern at the other side of the moat . it vanish among the , and then appear again come slowly in our direction . " ' here they be ! ' i exclaim . " ' you will challenge him , , as usual , ' whisper . ' give him no cause for fear . send us in with him , and we shall do the rest while you stay here on guard . have the lantern ready to uncover , that we may be sure that it be indeed the man . ' " the light have flicker onwards , now stop and now advance , until i could see two dark figure upon the other side of the moat . i let them scramble down the sloping bank , splash through the mire , and climb half-way up to the gate , before i challenge them . " ' who go there ? ' say i , in a subdued voice . " ' friend , ' come the answer . i uncover my lantern and throw a flood of light upon them . the first be an enormous sikh , with a black beard which sweep nearly down to his cummerbund . outside of a show i have never see so tall a man . the other be a little , fat , round fellow , with a great yellow turban , and a bundle in his hand , do up in a shawl . he seem to be all in a quiver with fear , for his hand twitch as if he have the ague , and his head keep turn to left and right with two bright little twinkling eye , like a mouse when he venture out from his hole . it give me the chill to think of kill him , but i think of the treasure , and my heart set as hard as a flint within me . when he see my white face he give a little chirrup of joy and come run up towards me . " ' your protection , , ' he pant , -- protection for the unhappy merchant . i have travel across that i might seek the shelter of the fort at . i have be rob and beat and abuse because i have be the friend of the company . it be a blessed night this when i be once more in safety , -- and my poor possession . ' " ' what have you in the bundle ? ' i ask . " ' an iron box , ' he answer , ' which contain one or two little family matter which be of no value to other , but which i should be sorry to lose . yet i be not a beggar ; and i shall reward you , young , and your governor also , if he will give me the shelter i ask . ' " i could not trust myself to speak longer with the man . the more i look at his fat , frightened face , the harder do it seem that we should slay him in cold blood . it be well to get it over . " ' take him to the main guard , ' say the two sikh close in upon him on each side , and the giant walk behind , while they march in through the dark . never be a man so compass round with death . i remain at the with the lantern . " i could hear the measure tramp of their footstep sound through the lonely corridor . suddenly it cease , and i hear voice , and a scuffle , with the sound of blow . a moment later there come , to my horror , a rush of footstep come in my direction , with the loud breathing of a run man . i turn my lantern down the long , straight passage , and there be the fat man , run like the wind , with a smear of blood across his face , and close at his heel , bound like a tiger , the great sikh , with a knife flash in his hand . i have never see a man run so fast as that little merchant . he be gain on the sikh , and i could see that if he once pass me and get to the open air he would save himself yet . my heart soften to him , but again the thought of his treasure turn me hard and bitter . i cast my firelock between his leg as he race past , and he roll twice over like a shot rabbit . ere he could stagger to his foot the sikh be upon him , and bury his knife twice in his side . the man never utter moan nor move muscle , but lay be he have fall . i think myself that he may have break his neck with the fall . you see , gentleman , that i be keep my promise . i be tell you every work of the business just exactly as it happen , whether it be in my favor or not . " he stop , and hold out his manacle hand for the which have brew for him . for myself , i confess that i have now conceive the utmost horror of the man , not only for this cold-blooded business in which he have be concern , but even more for the somewhat flippant and careless way in which he narrate it . whatever punishment be in store for him , i feel that he might expect no sympathy from me . and sit with their hand upon their knee , deeply interested in the story , but with the same disgust write upon their face . he may have observe it , for there be a touch of defiance in his voice and manner as he proceed . " it be all very bad , no doubt , " say he . " i should like to know how many fellow in my shoe would have refuse a share of this loot when they know that they would have their throat cut for their pain . besides , it be my life or his when once he be in the fort . if he have get out , the whole business would come to light , and i should have be and shoot as likely as not ; for people be not very lenient at a time like that . " " go on with your story , " say , shortly . " well , we carry him in , , , and a fine weight he be , too , for all that he be so short . be leave to guard the door . we take him to a place which the sikh have already prepare . it be some distance off , where a wind passage lead to a great empty hall , the brick wall of which be all crumble to piece . the earth floor have sink in at one place , make a natural grave , so we leave the merchant there , have first cover him over with loose brick . this do , we all go back to the treasure . " it lay where he have drop it when he be first attack . the box be the same which now lie open upon your table . a key be hang by a silken cord to that carve handle upon the top . we open it , and the light of the lantern gleam upon a collection of gem such as i have read of and think about when i be a little lad at . it be blind to look upon them . when we have feast our eye we take them all out and make a list of them . there be one hundred and diamond of the first water , include one which have be call , i believe , ' the great mogul ' and be say to be the second large stone in existence . then there be very fine emerald , and one hundred and seventy ruby , some of which , however , be small . there be forty carbuncle , two hundred and ten sapphire , agate , and a great quantity of beryl , onyx , , turquoise , and other stone , the very name of which i do not know at the time , though i have become more familiar with them since . besides this , there be nearly three hundred very fine pearl , twelve of which be set in a gold coronet . by the way , these last have be take out of the chest and be not there when i recover it . " after we have count our treasure we put them back into the chest and carry them to the to show them to . then we solemnly renew our oath to stand by each other and be true to our secret . we agree to conceal our loot in a safe place until the country should be at peace again , and then to divide it equally among ourselves . there be no use divide it at present , for if gem of such value be find upon us it would cause suspicion , and there be no privacy in the fort nor any place where we could keep them . we carry the box , therefore , into the same hall where we have bury the body , and there , under certain brick in the wall , we make a hollow and put our treasure . we make careful note of the place , and next day i draw four plan , one for each of us , and put the sign of the four of us at the bottom , for we have swear that we should each always act for all , so that none might take advantage . that be an oath that i can put my hand to my heart and swear that i have never break . " well , there be no use my tell you gentleman what come of the indian mutiny . after take and relieve the back of the business be break . fresh troop come pour in , and make himself scarce over the frontier . a fly column under come round to and clear the away from it . peace seem to be settle upon the country , and we four be begin to hope that the time be at hand when we might safely go off with our share of the plunder . in a moment , however , our hope be shatter by our be arrest as the murderer of . " it come about in this way . when the rajah put his jewel into the hand of he do it because he know that he be a trusty man . they be suspicious folk in the , however : so what do this rajah do but take a second even more trusty servant and set him to play the spy upon the first ? this second man be order never to let out of his sight , and he follow him like his shadow . he go after him that night and see him pass through the doorway . of course he think he have take refuge in the fort , and apply for admission there himself next day , but could find no trace of . this seem to him so strange that he speak about it to a sergeant of guide , who bring it to the ear of the commandant . a thorough search be quickly make , and the body be discover . thus at the very moment that we think that all be safe we be all four seize and bring to trial on a charge of murder , -- of us because we have hold the gate that night , and the fourth because he be know to have be in the company of the murder man . not a word about the jewel come out at the trial , for the rajah have be depose and drive out of : so no one have any particular interest in them . the murder , however , be clearly make out , and it be certain that we must all have be concern in it . the three sikh get penal servitude for life , and i be condemn to death , though my sentence be afterwards commute into the same as the other . " it be rather a queer position that we find ourselves in then . there we be all four tie by the leg and with precious little chance of ever get out again , while we each hold a secret which might have put each of us in a palace if we could only have make use of it . it be enough to make a man eat his heart out to have to stand the kick and the cuff of every petty jack-in-office , to have rice to eat and water to drink , when that gorgeous fortune be ready for him outside , just wait to be pick up . it might have drive me mad ; but i be always a pretty stubborn one , so i just hold on and bide my time . " at last it seem to me to have come . i be change from to , and from there to in the . there be very few white convict at this settlement , and , as i have behave well from the first , i soon find myself a sort of privileged person . i be give a hut in , which be a small place on the slope of , and i be leave pretty much to myself . it be a dreary , place , and all beyond our little clearing be infest with wild cannibal native , who be ready enough to blow a poison dart at us if they see a chance . there be digging , and ditch , and , and a dozen other thing to be do , so we be busy enough all day ; though in the evening we have a little time to ourselves . among other thing , i learn to dispense drug for the surgeon , and pick up a smattering of his knowledge . all the time i be on the lookout for a chance of escape ; but it be hundred of mile from any other land , and there be little or no wind in those sea : so it be a terribly difficult job to get away . " the surgeon , , be a fast , sport young chap , and the other young officer would meet in his room of an evening and play card . the surgery , where i use to make up my drug , be next to his sitting-room , with a small window between us . often , if i feel lonesome , i use to turn out the lamp in the surgery , and then , stand there , i could hear their talk and watch their play . i be fond of a hand at card myself , and it be almost as good as have one to watch the other . there be , , and , who be in command of the native troop , and there be the surgeon himself , and two or three , crafty old hand who play a nice sly safe game . a very snug little party they use to make . " well , there be one thing which very soon strike me , and that be that the soldier use always to lose and the civilian to win . mind , i do n't say that there be anything unfair , but so it be . these have do little else than play card ever since they have be at the , and they know each other 's game to a point , while the other just play to pass the time and throw their card down anyhow . night after night the soldier get up poor man , and the poor they get the more keen they be to play . be the hard hit . he use to pay in note and gold at first , but soon it come to note of hand and for big sum . he sometimes would win for a few deal , just to give him heart , and then the luck would set in against him bad than ever . all day he would wander about as black as thunder , and he take to drink a deal more than be good for him . " one night he lose even more heavily than usual . i be sit in my hut when he and come stumble along on the way to their quarter . they be bosom friend , those two , and never far apart . the major be rave about his loss . " ' it be all up , , ' he be say , as they pass my hut . ' i shall have to send in my paper . i be a ruin man . ' " ' nonsense , old chap ! ' say the other , slap him upon the shoulder . ' i have have a nasty facer myself , -- ' that be all i could hear , but it be enough to set me think . " a couple of day later major be stroll on the beach : so i take the chance of speak to him . " ' i wish to have your advice , major , ' say " ' well , , what be it ? ' he ask , take his cheroot from his lip . " ' i want to ask you , sir , ' say i , ' who be the proper person to whom hidden treasure should be hand over . i know where half a million worth lie , and , as i can use it myself , i think perhaps the good thing that i could do would be to hand it over to the proper authority , and then perhaps they would get my sentence shorten for me . ' " ' half a million , ? ' he gasp , look hard at me to see if i be in earnest . " ' quite that , sir , -- jewel and pearl . it lie there ready for any one . and the queer thing about it be that the real owner be outlaw and can hold property , so that it belong to the first comer . ' " ' to government , , ' he stammer , -- government . ' but he say it in a halting fashion , and i know in my heart that i have get him . " ' you think , then , sir , that i should give the information to the governor-general ? ' say i , quietly . " ' well , well , you must not do anything rash , or that you might repent . let me hear all about it , . give me the fact . ' " i tell him the whole story , with small change so that he could not identify the place . when i have finish he stand stock still and full of thought . i could see by the twitch of his lip that there be a struggle go on within him . " ' this be a very important matter , , ' he say , at last . ' you must not say a word to any one about it , and i shall see you again soon . ' " two night later he and his friend come to my hut in the dead of the night with a lantern . " ' i want you just to let hear that story from your own lip , small , ' say he . " i repeat it as i have tell it before . " ' it ring true , ? ' say he . ' it be good enough to act upon ? ' " nod . " ' look here , , ' say the major . ' we have be talk it over , my friend here and i , and we have come to the conclusion that this secret of yours be hardly a government matter , after all , but be a private concern of your own , which of course you have the power of dispose of as you think well . now , the question be , what price would you ask for it ? we might be incline to take it up , and at least look into it , if we could agree as to term . ' he try to speak in a cool , careless way , but his eye be shine with excitement and greed . " ' why , as to that , gentleman , ' i answer , try also to be cool , but feel as excited as he do , ' there be only one bargain which a man in my position can make . i shall want you to help me to my freedom , and to help my three companion to theirs . we shall then take you into partnership , and give you a fifth share to divide between you . ' " ' ! ' say he . ' a fifth share ! that be not very tempting . ' " ' it would come to fifty thousand apiece , ' say " ' but how can we gain your freedom ? you know very well that you ask an impossibility . ' " ' nothing of the sort , ' i answer . ' i have think it all out to the last detail . the only bar to our escape be that we can get no boat fit for the voyage , and no provision to last us for so long a time . there be plenty of little yacht and yawl at or which would serve our turn well . do you bring one over . we shall engage to get aboard her by night , and if you will drop us on any part of the indian coast you will have do your part of the bargain . ' " ' if there be only one , ' he say . " ' none or all , ' i answer . ' we have swear it . the four of us must always act together . ' " ' you see , , ' say he , ' be a man of his word . he do not flinch from his friend . i think we may very well trust him . ' " ' it be a dirty business , ' the other answer . ' yet , as you say , the money would save our commission handsomely . ' " ' well , , ' say the major , ' we must , i suppose , try and meet you . we must first , of course , test the truth of your story . tell me where the box be hide , and i shall get leave of absence and go back to in the monthly to inquire into the affair . ' " ' not so fast , ' say i , grow cold as he get hot . ' i must have the consent of my three comrade . i tell you that it be four or none with us . ' " ' nonsense ! ' he break in . ' what have three black fellow to do with our agreement ? ' " ' or blue , ' say i , ' they be in with me , and we all go together . ' " well , the matter end by a second meeting , at which , , and be all present . we talk the matter over again , and at last we come to an arrangement . we be to provide both the officer with chart of the part of the fort and mark the place in the wall where the treasure be hide . be to go to to test our story . if he find the box he be to leave it there , to send out a small yacht provision for a voyage , which be to lie off , and to which we be to make our way , and finally to return to his duty . be then to apply for leave of absence , to meet us at , and there we be to have a final division of the treasure , he take the major 's share as well as his own . all this we seal by the most solemn oath that the mind could think or the lip utter . i sit up all night with paper and ink , and by the morning i have the two chart all ready , sign with the sign of four , -- be , of , , , and myself . " well , gentleman , i weary you with my long story , and i know that my friend be impatient to get me safely stow in chokey . i will make it as short as i can . the villain go off to , but he never come back again . show me his name among a list of passenger in one of the very shortly afterwards . his uncle have die , leave him a fortune , and he have leave the army , yet he could stoop to treat five man as he have treat us . go over to shortly afterwards , and find , as we expect , that the treasure be indeed go . the scoundrel have steal it all , without carry out one of the condition on which we have sell him the secret . from that day i live only for vengeance . i think of it by day and i nurse it by night . it become an overpowering , absorbing passion with me . i care nothing for the law , -- for the gallows . to escape , to track down , to have my hand upon his throat , -- be my one thought . even the treasure have come to be a small thing in my mind than the slaying of . " well , i have set my mind on many thing in this life , and never one which i do not carry out . but it be weary year before my time come . i have tell you that i have pick up something of medicine . one day when be down with a fever a little be pick up by a in the wood . he be sick to death , and have go to a lonely place to die . i take him in hand , though he be as venomous as a young snake , and after a couple of month i get him all right and able to walk . he take a kind of fancy to me then , and would hardly go back to his wood , but be always hang about my hut . i learn a little of his lingo from him , and this make him all the fond of me . " that be his a fine boatman , and own a big , roomy canoe of his own . when i find that he be devote to me and would do anything to serve me , i see my chance of escape . i talk it over with him . he be to bring his boat round on a certain night to an old wharf which be never guard , and there he be to pick me up . i give him directions to have several gourd of water and a lot of yam , , and sweet potato . " he be stanch and true , be little . no man ever have a more faithful mate . at the night name he have his boat at the wharf . as it chance , however , there be one of the down there , -- vile who have never miss a chance of insult and injure me . i have always vow vengeance , and now i have my chance . it be as if fate have place him in my way that i might pay my debt before i leave the island . he stand on the bank with his back to me , and his carbine on his shoulder . i look about for a stone to beat out his brain with , but none could i see . then a queer thought come into my head and show me where i could lay my hand on a weapon . i sit down in the darkness and unstrap my wooden leg . with three long hop i be on him . he put his carbine to his shoulder , but i strike him full , and knock the whole front of his skull in . you can see the split in the wood now where i hit him . we both go down together , for i could not keep my balance , but when i get up i find him still lie quiet enough . i make for the boat , and in an hour we be well out at sea . have bring all his earthly possession with him , his arm and his god . among other thing , he have a long bamboo spear , and some matting , with which i make a sort of sail . for ten day we be beat about , trust to luck , and on the eleventh we be pick up by a trader which be go from to with a cargo of malay pilgrim . they be a rum crowd , and and i soon manage to settle down among them . they have one very good quality : they let you alone and ask no question . " well , if i be to tell you all the adventure that my little chum and i go through , you would not thank me , for i would have you here until the sun be shine . here and there we drift about the world , something always turn up to keep us from . all the time , however , i never lose sight of my purpose . i would dream of at night . a hundred time i have kill him in my sleep . at last , however , some three or four year ago , we find ourselves in . i have no great difficulty in find where live , and i set to work to discover whether he have realize the treasure , or if he still have it . i make friend with someone who could help me , -- name no name , for i do n't want to get any one else in a hole , -- i soon find that he still have the jewel . then i try to get at him in many way ; but he be pretty sly , and have always two , besides his son and his , on guard over him . " one day , however , i get word that he be die . i hurry at once to the garden , mad that he should slip out of my clutch like that , and , look through the window , i see him lie in his bed , with his son on each side of him . i will have come through and take my chance with the three of them , only even as i look at him his jaw drop , and i know that he be go . i get into his room that same night , though , and i search his paper to see if there be any record of where he have hide our jewel . there be not a line , however : so i come away , bitter and savage as a man could be . before i leave i bethink me that if i ever meet my sikh friend again it would be a satisfaction to know that i have leave some mark of our hatred : so i scrawl down the sign of the four of us , as it have be on the chart , and i pin it on his bosom . it be too much that he should be take to the grave without some token from the man whom he have rob and befool . " we earn a living at this time by my exhibit poor at fair and other such place as the black cannibal . he would eat raw meat and dance his war-dance : so we always have a hatful of penny after a day 's work . i still hear all the news from , and for some year there be no news to hear , except that they be hunt for the treasure . at last , however , come what we have wait for so long . the treasure have be find . it be up at the top of the house , in 's chemical laboratory . i come at once and have a look at the place , but i could not see how with my wooden leg i be to make my way up to it . i learn , however , about a trap-door in the roof , and also about 's . it seem to me that i could manage the thing easily through . i bring him out with me with a long rope wind round his waist . he could climb like a cat , and he soon make his way through the roof , but , as ill luck would have it , be still in the room , to his cost . think he have do something very clever in kill him , for when i come up by the rope i find him strut about as proud as a peacock . very much surprise be he when i make at him with the rope 's end and curse him for a little blood-thirsty imp . i take the and let it down , and then slide down myself , have first leave the sign of the four upon the table , to show that the jewel have come back at last to those who have most right to them . then pull up the rope , close the window , and make off the way that he have come . " i do n't know that i have anything else to tell you . i have hear a waterman speak of the speed of 's launch the , so i think she would be a handy craft for our escape . i engage with old , and be to give him a big sum if he get us safe to our ship . he know , no doubt , that there be some screw loose , but he be not in our secret . all this be the truth , and if i tell it to you , gentleman , it be not to amuse you , -- you have not do me a very good turn , -- it be because i believe the good defence i can make be just to hold back nothing , but let all the world know how badly i have myself be serve by , and how innocent i be of the death of his son . " " a very remarkable account , " say . " a fitting wind-up to an extremely interesting case . there be nothing at all new to me in the latter part of your narrative , except that you bring your own rope . that i do not know . by the way , i have hope that have lose all his darts ; yet he manage to shoot one at us in the boat . " " he have lose them all , sir , except the one which be in his at the time . " " ah , of course , " say . " i have not think of that . " " be there any other point which you would like to ask about ? " ask the convict , affably . " i think not , thank you , " my companion answer . " well , , " say , " you be a man to be humor , and we all know that you be a connoisseur of crime , but duty be duty , and i have go rather far in do what you and your friend ask me . i shall feel more at ease when we have our story-teller here safe under lock and key . the cab still wait , and there be two inspector . i be much oblige to you both for your assistance . of course you will be want at the trial . to you . " " , gentleman both , " say . " you first , , " remark the wary as they leave the room . " i will take particular care that you do n't club me with your wooden leg , whatever you may have do to the gentleman at the . " " well , and there be the end of our little drama , " i remark , after we have set some time smoking in silence . " i fear that it may be the last investigation in which i shall have the chance of study your method . have do me the honor to accept me as a husband in prospective . " he give a most dismal groan . " i fear as much , " say he . " i really can congratulate you . " i be a little hurt . " have you any reason to be dissatisfy with my choice ? " i ask . " not at all . i think she be one of the most charming young lady i ever meet , and might have be most useful in such work as we have be do . she have a decide genius that way : witness the way in which she preserve that plan from all the other paper of her father . but love be an emotional thing , and whatever be emotional be oppose to that true cold reason which i place above all thing . i should never marry myself , lest i bias my judgment . " " i trust , " say i , laugh , " that my judgment may survive the ordeal . but you look weary . " " yes , the reaction be already upon me . i shall be as limp as a rag for a week . " " strange , " say i , " how term of what in another man i should call laziness alternate with your fit of splendid energy and vigor . " " yes , " he answer , " there be in me the makings of a very fine loafer and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow . i often think of those line of old goethe , -- - die , zum war und zum . " by the way , a of this business , you see that they have , as i surmise , a confederate in the house , who could be none other than , the butler : so actually have the undivided honor of have catch one fish in his great haul . " " the division seem rather unfair , " i remark . " you have do all the work in this business . i get a wife out of it , get the credit , pray what remain for you ? " " for me , " say , " there still remain the . " and he stretch his long white hand up for it .