, student of law in the of , have endeavour in the ensue page to lay my statement before the public in a concise and business-like fashion . it be not my wish to achieve literary success , nor have i any desire by the grace of my style , or by the artistic order of my incident , to throw a deep shadow over the strange passage of which i shall have to speak . my high ambition be that those who know something of the matter should , after read my account , be able to conscientiously indorse it without find a single paragraph in which i have either add to or detract from the truth . should i attain this result , i shall rest amply satisfy with the outcome of my first , and probably my last , venture in literature . it be my intention to write out the sequence of event in due order , depend on trustworthy hearsay when i be describe that which be beyond my own personal knowledge . i have now , however , through the kind cooperation of friend , hit upon a plan which promise to be less onerous to me and more satisfactory to the reader . this be nothing less than to make use of the various manuscript which i have by me bear upon the subject , and to add to them the first-hand evidence contribute by those who have the good opportunity of know . in pursuance of this design i shall lay before the public the testimony of , formerly coachman at , and of , . , now practise at , in . to these i shall add a verbatim account extract from the journal of the late , of the event which occur in the in the autumn of ' @card@ towards the end of the first , with a description of the skirmish in the defile , and of the death of the man . to myself i reserve the duty of fill up all the gap and chink which may be leave in the narrative . by this arrangement i have sink from the position of an author to that of a compiler , but on the other hand my work have cease to be a story and have expand into a series of affidavit . , , be a well know oriental and sanskrit scholar , and his name be still of weight with those who be interested in such matter . he it be who first after call attention to the great value of early persian literature , and his translation from the and from have earn the warm commendation from the , of , and other distinguished continental critic . in the issue of the for , @card@ , he be describe as " und " -- passage which i well remember that he cut out and stow away , with a pardonable vanity , among the most revere family archives . he have be bring up to be a solicitor , or to the , as it be term in , but his learn hobby absorb so much of his time that he have little to devote to the pursuit of his profession . when his client be seek him at his chamber in , he be bury in the recess of the advocate ' library , or pore over some mouldy manuscript at the , with his brain more exercise over the code which propound six hundred year before the birth of than over the knotty problem of scottish law in the nineteenth century . hence it can hardly be wonder at that as his learning accumulate his practice dissolve , until at the very moment when he have attain the zenith of his celebrity he have also reach the nadir of his fortune . there be no chair of in any of his native university , and no demand anywhere for the only mental ware which he have to dispose of , we should have be force to retire into genteel poverty , console ourselves with the aphorism and precept of , , and other of his eastern favourite , have it not be for the kindness and liberality of his half-brother , the of , in . this be the proprietor of a landed estate , the acreage which bear , unfortunately , a most relation to its value , for it form the bleak and most barren tract of land in the whole of a bleak and barren shire . as a bachelor , however , his expense have be small , and he have contrive from the rent of his scattered cottage , and the sale of the nag , which he breed upon the moor , not only to live as a laird should , but to put by a considerable sum in the bank . we have hear little from our kinsman during the day of our comparative prosperity , but just as we be at our wit 's end , there come a letter like a minister angel , give us assurance of sympathy and succour . in it the of tell us that one of his lung have be grow weak for some time , and that , of , have strongly advise him to spend the few year which be leave to him in some more genial climate . he have determine , therefore to set out for the of , and he beg that we should take up our residence at in his absence , and that my father should act as his land steward and agent at a salary which place us above all fear of want . our mother have be dead for some year , so that there be only myself , my father , and my sister to consult , and it may be readily imagine that it do not take us long to decide upon the acceptance of the laird 's generous offer . my father start for that very night , while and i follow a few day afterwards , bear with us two of learn book , and such other of our household effect that be worth the trouble and expense of transport . might have appear a poor when compare with the house of an english squire , but to us , after our long residence in stuffy apartment , it be of regal magnificence . the building be and low , with roof , window , and a profusion of dwell room with ceiling and oaken wainscot . in front be a small lawn , girt round with a thin fringe of haggard and ill grown beech , all gnarl and wither from the effect of the . behind lay the scattered hamlet of dozen cottage at by rude who look upon the laird as their natural protector . to the west be the broad , yellow beach and the , while in all other direction the desolate moor , in the foreground and purple in the distance , stretch away in long , low curve to the horizon . very bleak and lonely it be upon this coast . a man might walk many a weary mile and never see a live thing except the white , kittiwake , which scream and cry to each other with their shrill , sad voice . very lonely and very bleak ! once out of sight of and there be no sign of the work of man save only where the high , white tower of shoot up , like a headstone of some giant grave , from amid the fir and larch which gird it round . this great house , a mile or more from our dwelling , have be build by a wealthy merchant of strange taste and lonely habit , but at the time of our arrival it have be for many year , and stand with wall and vacant , stare window look blankly out over the hill side . empty and mildew , it serve only as a landmark to the fisherman , for they have find by experience that by keep the laird 's chimney and the white tower of in a line they could steer their way through the ugly reef which raise its jagged back , like that of some sleeping monster , above the troubled water of the wind-swept bay . to this wild spot it be that have bring my father , my sister , and myself . for us its loneliness have no terror . after the hubbub and bustle of a great city , and the weary task of uphold appearance upon a slender income , there be a grand , serenity in the long and the eager air . here at least there be no neighbour to pry and chatter . the laird have leave his phaeton and two pony behind him , with the aid of which my father and i would go the round of the estate do such light duty as fall to an agent , or " factor " as it be there call , while our gentle look to our household need , and brighten the dark old building . such be our simple , uneventful existence , until the summer night when an unlooked-for incident occur which prove to be the herald of those strange doing which i have take up my pen to describe . it have be my habit to pull out of an evening in the laird 's skiff and to catch a few whiting which might serve for our supper . on this well-remember occasion my sister come with me , sit with her book in the of the boat , while i hang my line over the bow . the sun have sink down behind the rugged irish coast , but a long bank of flush cloud still mark the spot , and cast a glory upon the water . the whole broad ocean be seam and scar with crimson streak . i have rise in the boat , and be gaze round in delight at the broad panorama of shore and sea and sky , when my sister pluck at my sleeve with a little , sharp cry of surprise . " see , , " she cry , " there be a light in ! " i turn my head and stare back at the tall , white turret which peep out above the belt of tree . as i gaze i distinctly see at one of the window the glint of a light , which suddenly vanish , and then shine out once more from another high up . there it flicker for some time , and finally flash past two successive window underneath before the tree obscure our view of it . it be clear that some one bearing a lamp or a candle have climb up the tower stair and have then return into the body of the house . " who in the world can it be ? " i exclaim , speak rather to myself than to , for i could see by the surprise upon her face that she have no solution to offer . " maybe some of the folk from have want to look over the place . " my sister shake her head . " there be not one of them would dare to set foot within the avenue gate , " she say . " besides , , the key be keep by the at . be they ever so curious , none of our people could find their way in . " when i reflect upon the massive door and ponderous shutter which guard the low storey of , i could not but admit the force of my sister 's objection . the untimely visitor must either have use considerable violence in order to force his way in , or he must have obtain possession of the key . pique by the little mystery , i pull for the beach , with the determination to see for myself who the intruder might be , and what be his intention . leave my sister at , and summon , an old and one of the stout of the fisherman , i set off across the moor with him through the gathering darkness . " it a name after dark , yon , " remark my companion , slacken his pace perceptibly as i explain to him the nature of our errand . " it be no for that him own it gang within a scotch mile . " " well , , there be some one who have no fear about go into it , " say i , point to the great , white building which flicker up in front of us through the gloom . the light which i have observe from the sea be move backwards and forward past the low floor window , the shutter of which have be remove . i could now see that a second fainter light follow a few pace behind the other . evidently two individual , the one with a lamp and the other with a candle or rushlight , be make a careful examination of the building . " let man his ain , " say doggedly , come to a dead stop . " what be it us if a wraith or a bogle mind ' a fancy ? it be no canny meddle ' such thing . " " why , man , " i cry , " you do n't suppose a wraith come here in a gig ? what be those light away yonder by the avenue gate ? " " the lamp o ' a gig , sure enough ! " exclaim my companion in a less lugubrious voice . " let be steer for it , , and where she hail frae . " by this time night have close in save for a single long , narrow slit in the westward . stumble across the moor together , we make our way into the , at the point where the high stone pillar mark the entrance to the avenue . a tall dog-cart stand in front of the gateway , the horse browsing upon the thin border of grass which skirt the road . " it be a ' ! " say , take a close look at the desert vehicle . " i ken it . it belong , the factor body frae keep the key . " " then we may as well have speech with him now that we be here , " i answer . " they be come down , if i be not mistake . " as i speak we hear the slam of the heavy door and within a few minute two figure , the one tall and angular , the other short and thick come towards us through the darkness . they be talk so earnestly that they do not observe us until they have pass through the avenue gate . " good evening , , " say i , step forward and address the factor , with whom i have some slight acquaintance . the small of the two turn his face towards me as i speak , and show me that i be not mistake in his identity , but his tall companion spring back and show every sign of violent agitation . " what be this , ? " i hear him say , in a gasp , choke voice . " be this your promise ? what be the meaning of it ? " " do n't be alarm , ! do n't be alarm ! " say the little fat factor in a soothing fashion , as one might speak to a frightened child . " this be young , of , though what bring him up here tonight be more than i can understand . however , as you be to be neighbour , i ca n't do well than take the opportunity to introduce you to each other . , this be , who be about to take a lease of . " i hold out my hand to the tall man , who take it in a hesitate , fashion . " i come up , " i explain , " because i see your light in the window , and i think that something might be wrong . i be very glad i do so , since it have give me the chance of make the general 's acquaintance . " whilst i be talk , i be conscious that the new tenant of be peer at me very closely through the darkness . as i conclude , he stretch out a long , tremulous arm , and turn the in such a way as to throw a flood of light upon my face . " , ! " he cry , in the same quiver voice as before , " the fellow be as brown as chocolate . he be not an englishman . you be not an , sir ? " " i be a scotchman , bear and breed , " say i , with an inclination to laugh , which be only check by my new acquaintance 's obvious terror . " a scotchman , ? " say he , with a sigh of relief . " it be all one nowadays . you must excuse me , -- . . i be nervous , infernally nervous . come along , , we must be back in in less than an hour . , gentleman , ! " the two clamber into their place ; the factor crack his whip , and the high dog-cart clatter away through the darkness , cast a brilliant tunnel of yellow light on either side of it , until the rumble of its wheel die away in the distance . " what do you think of our new neighbour , ? " i ask , after a long silence . " ' , , he seem , as he say ' , to be nervous . maybe his conscience be o ' order . " " his liver , more likely , " say " he look as if he have try his constitution a bit . but it be blow chill , , my lad , and it be time both of us be indoors . " i bid my companion , and strike off across the moor for the cheery , ruddy light which mark the parlour window of . there be , as may well be imagine , much stir amongst our small community at the news that the be to be inhabit once more , and considerable speculation as to the new tenant , and their object in choose this particular part of the country for their residence . it speedily become apparent that , whatever their motive might be , they have definitely determine upon a lengthy stay , for relay of plumber and of joiner come down from , and there be hammer and repair go on from morning till night . it be surprising how quickly the sign of the wind and weather be efface , until the great , house be all as spick-and-span as though it have be erect yesterday . there be abundant sign that money be no consideration to , and that it be not on the score of retrenchment that he have take up his abode among us . " it may be that he be devote to study , " suggest my father , as we discuss the question round the breakfast table . " perhaps he have choose this secluded spot to finish some magnum opus upon which he be engage . if that be the case i should be happy to let him have the run of my library . " and i laugh at the grandiloquent manner in which he speak of the two of book . " it may be as you say , " say i , " but the general do not strike me during our short interview as be a man who be likely to have any very pronounce literary taste . if i might hazard a guess , i should say that he be here upon medical advice , in the hope that the complete quiet and fresh air may restore his shattered nervous system . if you have see how he glare at me , and the twitch of his finger , you would have think it need some restore . " " i do wonder whether he have a wife and a family , " say my sister . " poor soul , how lonely they will be ! why , except ourselves , there be not a family that they could speak to for seven mile and more . " " be a very distinguished soldier , " remark my father . " why , papa , however come you to know anything about him ? " " ah , my dear , " say my father , smile at us over his , " you be laugh at my library just now , but you see it may be very useful at time . " as he speak he take a volume from a shelf and turn over the page . " this be an indian of three year back , " he explain , " and here be the very gentleman we , , of the , ' my dear , ' ' , think of that , ' ' -- colonel in the , , but now retire with the rank of major-general . ' in this other column be a record of his of and defence of , @card@ , and reduction of . five time mention in dispatch . ' i think , my dear , that we have cause to be proud of our new neighbour . " " it do n't mention there whether he be married or not , i suppose ? " ask . " no , " say my father , wag his white head with a keen appreciation of his own humour . " it do n't include that under the head of ' daring it very well might , my dear , it very well might . " all our doubt , however , upon this head be very soon set at rest , for on the very day that the repair and the furnish have be complete i have occasion to ride into , and i meet upon the way a carriage which be bear and his family to their new home . an elderly lady , worn and , be by his side , and opposite him sit a young fellow about my own age and a girl who appear to be a couple of year young . i raise my hat , and be about to pass them , when the general shout to his coachman to pull up , and hold out his hand to me . i could see now in the daylight that his face , although harsh and stern , be capable of assume a not unkindly expression . " how be you , ? " he cry . " i must apologise to you if i be a little brusque the other will excuse an old soldier who have spend the good part of his life in the same , you must confess that you be rather dark-skinned for a scotchman . " " we have a spanish strain in our blood , " say i , wonder at his recurrence to the topic . " that would , of course , account for it , " he remark . " my dear , " to his wife , " allow me to introduce west to you . this be my son and my daughter . we have come here in search of rest , rest . " " and you could not possibly have come to a good place , " say " oh , you think so ? " he answer . " i suppose it be very quiet indeed , and very lonely . you might walk through these country lane at night , i dare say , and never meet a soul , ? " " well , there be not many about after dark , " i say . " and you be not much trouble with vagrant or wander beggar , ? not many tinker or tramp or rascally vermin of that sort about ? " " i find it rather cold , " say , draw her thick sealskin mantle tight round her figure . " we be detain , too . " " so we be , my dear , so we be . drive on , coachman . , . " the carriage rattle away towards the , and i trot thoughtfully onwards to the little country metropolis . as i pass up the , run out from his office and beckon to me to stop . " our new tenant have go out , " he say . " they drive over this morning . " " i meet them on the way , " i answer . as i look down at the little factor , i could see that his face be flush and that he bear every appearance of have have an extra glass . " give me a real gentleman to do business with , " he say , with a burst of laughter . " they understand me and i understand them . ' what shall i fill it up for ? ' say the general , take a blank cheque out o ' his pouch and lay it on the table . ' two hundred , ' say i , leave a bit o ' a margin for my own time and trouble . " " i think that the landlord have pay you for that , " i remark . " aye , aye , but it be well to have a bit margin . he fill it up and throw it over to me as if it have be an auld postage stamp . that be the way business should be do between honest it do if one be incline to take an advantage . will not come in , , and have a taste of my whisky ? " " no , thank you , " say i , " i have business to do . " " well , well , business be the chief thing . it be well not to drink in the morning , too . for my own part , except a drop before breakfast to give me an appetite , and maybe a glass , or even , afterwards to promote digestion , i never touch spirit before noon . what think o ' the general , ? " " why , i have hardly have an opportunity of judge , " i answer . tap his forehead with his forefinger . " that be what i think of him , " he say in a confidential whisper , shake his head at me . " he be go , sir , go , in my estimation . now what would you take to be a proof of madness , ? " " why , offer a blank cheque to a , " say " ah , you be aye at your joke . but between 's now , if a man ask how many mile it be frae a seaport , and whether ship come there from the , and whether there be tramp on the road , and whether it be against the lease for him to build a high wall round the ground , what would make of it , ? " " i should certainly think him eccentric , " say " if every man have his due , our friend would find ' in a house with a high wall round the ground , and that without cost him a farthing , " say the agent . " where then ? " i ask , humour his joke . " why , in the , " cry the little man , with a bubble of laughter , in the midst of which i ride on my way , leave him still chuckle over his own facetiousness . the arrival of the new family at have no perceptible effect in relieve the monotony of our secluded district , for instead of enter into such simple pleasure as the country have to offer , or interest themselves , as we have hope , in our attempt to improve the lot of our poor crofter and , they seem to shun all observation , and hardly ever to venture beyond the avenue gate . we soon find , too , that the factor 's word as to the inclose of the ground be found upon fact , for gang of workman be keep hard at work from early in the morning until late at night in erect a high , wooden fence round the whole estate . when this be finish and top with spike , become impregnable to any one but an exceptionally daring climber . it be as if the old soldier have be so imbue with military idea that , like my , he could not refrain even in time of peace from stand upon the defensive . stranger still , he have victual the house as if for a siege , for , the chief grocer of , tell me himself in a rapture of delight and amazement that the general have send him an order for hundred of dozen of every imaginable potted meat and vegetable . it may be imagine that all these unusual incident be not allow to pass without malicious comment . over the whole countryside and as far away as the english border there be nothing but gossip about the new tenant of and the reason which have lead them to come among us . the only hypothesis , however , which the bucolic mind could evolve , be that which have already occur to , the , that the old general and his family be one and all afflict with madness , or , as an alternative conclusion , that he have commit some heinous offence and be endeavour to escape the consequence of his misdeed . these be both natural supposition under the circumstance , but neither of them appear to me to commend itself as a true explanation of the fact . it be true that 's behaviour on the occasion of our first interview be such as to suggest some suspicion of mental disease , but no man could have be more reasonable or more courteous than he have afterwards show himself to be . then , again , his wife and child lead the same secluded life that he do himself , so that the reason could not be one peculiar to his own health . as to the possibility of his be a fugitive from justice , that theory be even more untenable . be bleak and lonely , but it be not such an obscure corner of the world that a well-known soldier could hope to conceal himself there , nor would a man who fear publicity set every one 's tongue wag as the general have do . on the whole , i be incline to believe that the true solution of the enigma lie in his own allusion to the love of quiet , and that they have take shelter here with an almost morbid craving for solitude and repose . we very soon have an instance of the great length to which this desire for isolation would carry them . my father have come down one morning with the weight of a great determination upon his brow . " you must put on your pink frock , , " say he , " and you , , you must make yourself smart , for i have determine that the three of us shall drive round this afternoon and pay our respect to and the general . " " a visit to , " cry , clap her hand . " i be here , " say my father , with dignity , " not only as the laird 's factor , but also as his kinsman . in that capacity i be convince that he would wish me to call upon these newcomer and offer them any politeness which be in our power . at present they must feel lonely and friendless . what say the great ? ' the choicest ornament to a man 's house be his friend . ' " my sister and i know by experience that when the old man begin to justify his resolution by quotation from the persian poet there be no chance of shake it . sure enough that afternoon see the phaeton at the door , with my father perch upon the seat , with his second-best coat on and a pair of new . " jump in , my dear , " he cry , crack his whip briskly , " we shall show the general that he have no cause to be ashamed of his neighbour . " alas ! pride always go before a fall . our well-fed pony and shine harness be not destine that day to impress the tenant of with a sense of our importance . we have reach the avenue gate , and i be about to get out and open it , when our attention be arrest by a very large wooden placard , which be attach to one of the tree in such a manner that no one could possibly pass without see it . on the white surface of this board be print in big , black letter the follow hospitable inscription : general and . no to of . we all sit gaze at this announcement for some moment in silent astonishment . then and , tickle by the absurdity of the thing , burst out laugh , but my father pull the pony ' head round , and drive home with compressed lip and the cloud of much wrath upon his brow . i have never see the good man so thoroughly move , and i be convince that his anger do not arise from any petty feeling of injured vanity upon his own part , but from the thought that a slight have be offer to the of , whose dignity he represent . if i have any personal soreness on account of this family snub , it be a very pass emotion , and one which be soon efface from my mind . it chance that on the very next day after the episode i have occasion to pass that way , and stop to have another look at the obnoxious placard . i be stand stare at it and wonder what could have induce our neighbour to take such an outrageous step , when i become suddenly aware of a sweet , girlish face which peep out at me from between the bar of the gate , and of a white hand which eagerly beckon me to approach . as i advance to her i see that it be the same young lady whom i have see in the carriage . " , " she say , in a quick whisper , glance from side to side as she speak in a nervous , hasty manner , " i wish to apologise to you for the indignity to which you and your family be subject yesterday . my brother be in the avenue and see it all , but he be powerless to interfere . i assure you , , that if that hateful thing , " point up at the placard , " have give you any annoyance , it have give my brother and myself far more . " " why , , " say i , put the matter off with a laugh , " be a free country , and if a man choose to warn off visitor from his premise there be no reason why he should not . " " it be nothing less than brutal , " she break out , with a petulant stamp of the foot . " to think that your sister , too , should have such an unprovoked insult offer to her ! i be ready to sink with shame at the very think . " " pray do not give yourself one moment 's uneasiness upon the subject , " say i earnestly , for i be grieve at her evident distress . " i be sure that your father have some reason unknown to us for take this step . " " heaven know he have ! " she answer , with ineffable sadness in her voice , " and yet i think it would be more manly to face a danger than to fly from it . however , he know good , and it be impossible for us to judge . but who be this ? " she exclaim , anxiously , peer up the dark avenue . " oh , it be my brother . , " she say , as the young man approach us , " i have be apologise to for what happen yesterday , in your name as well as my own . " " i be very , very glad to have the opportunity of do it in person , " say he courteously . " i only wish that i could see your sister and your father as well as yourself , to tell them how sorry i be . i think you have well run up to the house , little one , for it be get near . n't you go . i want to have a word with you . " wave her hand to me with a bright smile , and trip up the avenue , while her brother unbolt the gate , and , pass through , close it again , lock it upon the outside . " i will have a stroll down the road with you , if you have no objection . have a manilla . " he draw a couple of cheroot from his pocket and hand one to me . " you will find they be not bad , " he say . " i become a connoisseur in tobacco when i be in . i hope i be not interfere with your business in come along with you ? " " not at all , " i answer , " i be very glad to have your company . " " i will tell you a secret , " say my companion . " this be the first time that i have be outside the ground since we have be down here . " " and your sister ? " " she have never be out , either , " he answer . " i have give the governor the slip , but he would n't half like it if he know . it be a whim of his that we should keep ourselves entirely to ourselves . at least , some people would call it a whim , for my own part i have reason to believe that he have solid ground for all that he perhaps in this matter he may be a little too exacting . " " you must surely find it very lonely , " say " could n't you manage to slip down at time and have a smoke with me ? that house over yonder be . " " indeed , you be very kind , " he answer , with sparkling eye . " i should dearly like to run over now and again . with the exception of , our old coachman and gardener , i have not a soul that i can speak to . " " and your must feel it even more , " say i , think in my heart that my new acquaintance make rather too much of his own trouble and too little of those of his companion . " yes ; poor feel it , no doubt , " he answer carelessly , " but it be a more unnatural thing for a young man of my age to be coop up in this way than for a woman . look at me , now . i be next , and yet i have never be to a university , nor to a school for that matter . i be as complete an ignoramus as any of these clodhopper . it seem strange to you , no doubt , and yet it be so . now , do n't you think i deserve a good fate ? " he stop as he speak , and face round to me , throw his palm forward in appeal . as i look at him , with the sun shine upon his face , he certainly do seem a strange bird to be coop up in such a cage . tall and muscular , with a keen , dark face , and sharp , finely cut feature , he might have step out of a canvas of or . there be latent energy and power in his mouth , his square eyebrow , and the whole pose of his elastic , well-knit figure . " there be the learning to be get from book and the learning to be get from experience , " say i sententiously . " if you have less of your share of the one , perhaps you have more of the other . i can believe you have spend all your life in mere idleness and pleasure . " " pleasure ! " he cry . " pleasure ! look at this ! " he pull off his hat , and i see that his black hair be all deck and dash with streak of grey . " do you imagine that this come from pleasure ? " he ask , with a bitter laugh . " you must have have some great shock , " i say , astonish at the sight , " some terrible illness in your youth . or perhaps it arise from a more chronic constant gnawing anxiety . i have know man as young as you whose hair be as grey . " " poor brute ! " he mutter . " i pity them . " " if you can manage to slip down to at time , " i say , " perhaps you could bring with you . i know that my father and my sister would be delight to see her , and a change , if only for an hour or two , might do her good . " " it would be rather hard for us both to get away together , " he answer . " however , if i see a chance i shall bring her down . it might be manage some afternoon perhaps , for the old man indulge in a siesta occasionally . " we have reach the head of the wind lane which branch off from the high road and lead to the laird 's house , so my companion pull up . " i must go back , " he say abruptly , " or they will miss me . it be very kind of you , , to take this interest in us . i be very grateful to you , and so will be when she hear of your kind invitation . it be a real heap of coal of fire after that infernal placard of my father 's . " he shake my hand and set off down the road , but he come run after me presently , call me to stop . " i be just think , " he say , " that you must consider us a great mystery up there at . i dare say you have come to look upon it as a private lunatic asylum , and i ca n't blame you . if you be interested in the matter , i feel it be unfriendly upon my part not to satisfy your curiosity , but i have promise my father to be silent about it . and indeed if i be to tell you all that i know you might not be very much the wise after all . i would have you understand this , my father be as sane as you or i , and that he have very good reason for live the life which he do . i may add that his wish to remain secluded do not arise from any unworthy or dishonourable motive , but merely from the instinct of self-preservation . " " he be in danger , then ? " i ejaculate . " yes ; he be in constant danger . " " but why do he not apply to the magistrate for protection ? " i ask . " if he be afraid of any one , he have only to name him and they will bind him over to keep the peace . " " my dear west , " say young , " the danger with which my father be threaten be one that can be avert by any human intervention . it be none the less very real , and possibly very imminent . " " you do n't mean to assert that it be supernatural , " i say incredulously . " well , hardly that , either , " he answer with hesitation . " there , " he continue , " i have say rather more than i should , but i know that you will not abuse my confidence . good-bye ! " he take to his heel and be soon out of sight round a curve in the country road . a danger which be real and imminent , not to be avert by human mean , and yet hardly be a conundrum indeed ! i have come to look upon the inhabitant of the as mere eccentric , but after what young have just tell me , i could no longer doubt that some dark and sinister meaning underlie all their action . the more i ponder over the problem , the more unanswerable do it appear , and yet i could not get the matter out of my thought . the lonely , isolated , and the strange , impending catastrophe which hang over its inmate , appeal forcibly to my imagination . all that evening , and late into the night , i sit moodily by the fire , ponder over what i have hear , and revolve in my mind the various incident which might furnish me with some clue to the mystery . i trust that my reader will not set me down as an inquisitive busybody when i say that as the day and week go by i find my attention and my thought more and more attract to and the mystery which surround him . it be in vain that i endeavour by hard work and a strict attention to the laird 's affair to direct my mind into some more healthy channel . do what i would , on land or on the water , i would still find myself puzzling over this one question , until it obtain such a hold upon me that i feel it be useless for me to attempt to apply myself to anything until i have come to some satisfactory solution of it . i could never pass the dark line of five-foot fencing , and the great iron gate , with its massive lock , without pause and rack my brain as to what the secret might be which be shut in by that inscrutable barrier . yet , with all my conjecture and all my observation , i could never come to any conclusion which could for a moment be accept as an explanation of the fact . my sister have be out for a stroll one night , visit a sick peasant or perform some other of the numerous act of charity by which she have make herself beloved by the whole countryside . " , " she say when she return , " have you see at night ? " " no , " i answer , lay down the book which i be read . " not since that memorable evening when the general and come over to make an inspection . " " well , , will you put your hat on and come a little walk with me ? " i could see by her manner that something have agitate or frighten her . " why , bless the girl ! " cry i boisterously , " what be the matter ? the old be not on fire , surely ? you look as grave as if all be in a blaze . " " not quite so bad as that , " she say , smile . " but do come out , . i should very much like you to see it . " i have always refrain from say anything which might alarm my sister , so that she know nothing of the interest which our neighbour ' doing have for me . at her request i take my hat and follow her out into the darkness . she lead the way along a little footpath over the moor , which bring us to some rise ground , from which we could look down upon the without our view be obstruct by any of the which have be plant round it . " look at that ! " say my sister , pause at the summit of this little eminence . lie beneath us in a blaze of light . in the low floor the shutter obscure the illumination , but above , from the broad window of the second storey to the thin slit at the summit of the tower , there be not a chink or an aperture which do not send forth a stream of radiance . so dazzling be the effect that for a moment i be persuade that the house be on fire , but the steadiness and clearness of the light soon free me from that apprehension . it be clearly the result of many lamp place systematically all over the building . it add to the strange effect that all these brilliantly illuminate room be apparently , and some of them , so far as we could judge , be not even furnish . through the whole great house there be no sign of movement or of but the clear , unwinking flood of yellow light . i be still lose in wonder at the sight when i hear a short , quick sob at my side . " what be it , , dear ? " i ask , look down at my companion . " i feel so frightened . oh , , , take me home , i feel so frightened ! " she cling to my arm , and pull at my coat in a perfect frenzy of fear . " it be all safe , darling , " i say soothingly . " there be nothing to fear . what have upset you so ? " " i be afraid of them , ; i be afraid of the . why be their house light up like this every night ? i have hear from other that it be always so . and why do the old man run like a frightened hare if any one come upon him . there be something wrong about it , , and it frighten me . " i pacify her as well as i could , and lead her home with me , where i take care that she should have some hot port negus before go to bed . i avoid the subject of the for fear of excite her , and she do not recur to it of her own accord . i be convince , however , from what i have hear from her , that she have for some time back be make her own observation upon our neighbour , and that in do so she have put a considerable strain upon her nerve . i could see that the mere fact of the be illuminate at night be not enough to account for her extreme agitation , and that it must have derive its importance in her eye from be one in a chain of incident , all of which have leave a weird or unpleasant impression upon her mind . that be the conclusion which i come to at the time , and i have reason to know now that i be right , and that my sister have even more cause than i have myself for believe that there be something uncanny about the tenant of . our interest in the matter may have arise at first from nothing high than curiosity , but event soon look a turn which associate us more closely with the fortune of the family . have take advantage of my invitation to come down to the laird 's house , and on several occasion he bring with him his beautiful sister . the four of us would wander over the moor together , or perhaps if the day be fine set sail upon our little skiff and stand off into the irish . on such excursion the brother and sister would be as merry and as happy as two child . it be a keen pleasure to them to escape from their dull fortress , and to see , if only for a few hour , friendly and sympathetic face round them . there could be but one result when four young people be bring together in sweet , forbidden intercourse . warm into friendship , and friendship flame suddenly into love . sit beside me now as i write , and she agree with me that , dear as be the subject to ourselves , the whole story of our mutual affection be of too personal a nature to be more than touch upon in this statement . suffice it to say that , within a few week of our first meeting have win the heart of my dear sister , and have give me that pledge which death itself will not be able to break . i have allude in this brief way to the double tie which spring up between the two family , because i have no wish that this narrative should degenerate into anything approach to romance , or that i should lose the thread of the fact which i have set myself to chronicle . these be connect with , and only indirectly with my own personal history . it be enough if i say that after our engagement the visit to become more frequent , and that our friend be able sometimes to spend a whole day with us when business have call the general to , or when his gout confine him to his room . as to our good father , he be ever ready to greet us with many small jest and tag of oriental poem appropriate to the occasion , for we have no secret from him , and he already look upon us all as his child . there be time when on account of some peculiarly dark or restless fit of the general be it be impossible for week on end for either or to get away from the ground . the old man would even stand on guard , a gloomy and silent sentinel , at the avenue gate , or pace up and down the drive as though he suspect that attempt have be make to penetrate his seclusion . pass of an evening i have see his dark , grim figure flit about in the shadow of the tree , or catch a glimpse of his hard , angular , swarthy face peer out suspiciously at me from behind the bar . my heart would often sadden for him as i notice his uncouth , nervous movement , his furtive glance and twitch feature . who would have believe that this slink , cower creature have once be a dashing officer , who have fight the battle of his country and have win the palm of bravery among the host of brave man around him ? in spite of the old soldier 's vigilance , we manage to hold communication with our friend . immediately behind the there be a spot where the fencing have be so carelessly erect that two of the rail could be remove without difficulty , leave a broad gap , which give us the opportunity for many a stolen interview , though they be necessarily short , for the general 's movement be erratic , and no part of the ground be secure from his visitation . how vividly one of these hurried meeting rise before me ! it stand out clear , peaceful , and distinct amid the wild , mysterious incident which be destine to lead up to the terrible catastrophe which have cast a shade over our life . i can remember that as i walk through the field the grass be damp with the rain of the morning , and the air be heavy with the smell of the earth . be wait for me under the hawthorn tree outside the gap , and we stand hand-in-hand look down at the long sweep of moorland and at the broad blue channel which encircle it with its fringe of foam . far away in the the sun glint upon the high peak of . from where we stand we could see the smoke of the steamer as they plough along the busy which lead to . " be it not magnificent ? " cry , clasp her hand round my arm . " ah , , why be we not free to sail away over these wave together , and leave all our trouble behind us on the shore ? " " and what be the trouble which you would leave behind you , dear one ? " i ask . " may i not know them , and help you to bear them ? " " i have no secret from you , , " she answer . " our chief trouble be , as you may guess , our poor father 's strange behaviour . be it not a sad thing for all of us that a man who have play such a distinguished part in the world should skulk from one obscure corner of the country to another , and should defend himself with lock and barrier as though he be a common thief fly from justice ? this be a trouble , , which it be out of your power to alleviate . " " but why do he do it , ? " i ask . " i can tell , " she answer frankly . " i only know that he imagine some deadly danger to be hang over his head , and that this danger be incur by him during his stay in . what its nature may be i have no more idea than you have . " " then your brother have , " i remark . " i be sure from the way in which he speak to me about it one day that he know what it be , and that he look upon it as real . " " yes , he know , and so do my mother , " she answer , " but they have always keep it secret from me . my poor father be very excite at present . day and night he be in an agony of apprehension , but it will soon be the fifth of , and after that he will be at peace . " " how do you know that ? " i ask in surprise . " by experience , " she answer gravely . " on the fifth of these fear of his come to a crisis . for year back he have be in the habit of lock and myself up in our room on that date , so that we have no idea what occur , but we have always find that he have be much relieve afterwards , and have continue to be comparatively in peace until that day begin to draw round again . " " then you have only ten day or so to wait , " i remark , for be draw to a close . " by the way , dear , why be it that you light up all your room at night ? " " you have notice it , then ? " she say . " it come also from my father 's fear . he do not like to have one dark corner in the whole house . he walk about a good deal at night , and inspect everything , from the attic right down to the cellar . he have large lamp in every room and corridor , even the empty one , and he order the servant to light them all at dusk . " " i be rather surprise that you manage to keep your servant , " i say , laugh . " the maid in these part be a superstitious class , and their imagination be easily excite by anything which they do n't understand . " " the cook and both housemaid be from , and be use to our way . we pay them on a very high scale to make up for any inconvenience to which they may be put . , the coachman , be the only one who come from this part of the country , and he seem to be a stolid , honest fellow , who be not easily scare . " " poor little girl , " i exclaim , look down at the slim , graceful figure by my side . " this be no atmosphere for you to live in . why will you not let me rescue you from it ? why wo n't you allow me to go straight and ask the general for your hand ? at the bad he could only refuse . " she turn quite haggard and pale at the very think . " for 's sake , , " she cry earnestly , " do nothing of the kind . he would whip us all away in the dead of the night , and within a week we should be settle down again in some wilderness where we might never have a chance of see or hear from you again . besides , he never would forgive us for venture out of the ground . " " i do n't think that he be a hard-hearted man , " i remark . " i have see a kindly look in his eye , for all his stern face . " " he can be the kind of father , " she answer . " but he be terrible when oppose or thwart . you have never see him so , and i trust you never will . it be that strength of will and impatience of opposition which make him such a splendid officer . i assure you that in every one think a great deal of him . the soldier be afraid of him , but they would have follow him anywhere . " " and have he these nervous attack then ? " " occasionally , but not nearly so acutely . he seem to think that the it may more imminent every year . oh , , it be terrible to be wait like this with a sword over our all the more terrible to me since i have no idea where the blow be to come from . " " , " i say , take her hand and draw her to my side , " look over all this pleasant countryside and the broad blue sea . be it not all peaceful and beautiful ? in these cottage , with their roof peep out from the grey moor , there live none but simple , god-fearing man , who toil hard at their craft and bear enmity to no man . within seven mile of us be a large town , with every civilised appliance for the preservation of order . ten mile farther there be a garrison quarter , and a telegram would at any time bring down a company of soldier . now , i ask you , dear , in the name of common-sense , what conceivable danger could threaten you in this secluded neighbourhood , with the means of help so near ? you assure me that the peril be not connect with your father 's health ? " " no , i be sure of that . it be true that , of , have be over to see him once or twice , but that be merely for some small indisposition . i can assure you that the danger be not to be look for in that direction . " " then i can assure you , " say i , laugh , " that there be no danger at all . it must be some strange monomania or hallucination . no other hypothesis will cover the fact . " " would my father 's monomania account for the fact of my brother 's hair turn grey and my mother waste away to a mere shadow ? " " undoubtedly , " i answer . " the long continued worry of the general 's restlessness and irritability would produce those effect on sensitive nature . " " no , no ! " say she , shake her head sadly , " i have be expose to his restlessness and irritability , but they have have no such effect upon me . the difference between us lie in the fact that they know this awful secret and i do not . " " my dear girl , " say i , " the day of family apparition and that kind of thing be go . nobody be haunt nowadays , so we can put that supposition out of the question . have do so , what remain ? there be absolutely no other theory which could even be suggest . believe me , the whole mystery be that the heat of have be too much for your poor father 's brain . " what she would have answer i can tell , for at that moment she give a start as if some sound have fall upon her ear . as she look round apprehensively , i suddenly see her feature become rigid and her eye fix and dilate . follow the direction of her gaze , i feel a sudden thrill of fear pass through me as i perceive a human face survey us from behind one of the man 's face , every feature of which be distort by the most malignant hatred and anger . find himself observe , he step out and advance towards us , when i see that it be none other than the general himself . his beard be all with fury , and his eye glow from under their heavily vein lid with a most sinister and demoniacal brightness . " to your room , girl ! " he cry in a hoarse , harsh voice , step in between us and point authoritatively towards the house . he wait until , with a last frightened glance at me , have pass through the gap , and then he turn upon me with an expression so murderous that i step back a pace or two , and tighten my grasp upon my oak stick . " -- " he splutter , with his hand twitch at his throat , as though his fury be choke him . " you have dare to intrude upon my privacy ! do you think i build this fence that all the vermin in the country might congregate round it ? oh , you have be very near your death , my fine fellow ! you will never be near until your time come . look at this ! " he pull a squat , thick pistol out of his bosom . " if you have pass through that gap and set foot on my land i will have let daylight into you . i will have no vagabond here . i know how to treat gentry of that sort , whether their face be black or white . " " , " say i , " i mean no harm by come here , and i do not know how i have deserve this extraordinary outburst . allow me to observe , however , that you be still cover me with your pistol , and that , as your hand be rather tremulous , it be more than possible that it may go off . if you do n't turn the muzzle down i shall be compel in self-defence to strike you over the wrist with my stick . " " what the deuce bring you here , then ? " he ask , in a more composed voice , put his weapon back into his bosom . " ca n't a gentleman live quietly without your come to peep and pry ? have you no business of your own to look after , ? and my daughter ? how come you to know anything of her ? and what have you be try to squeeze out of her ? it be n't chance that bring you here . " " no , " say i boldly , " it be not chance which bring me here . i have have several opportunity of see your daughter and of appreciate her many noble quality . we be engage to be marry to each other , and i come up with the express intention of see her . " instead of blaze into a fury , as i have expect , the general give a long whistle of astonishment , and then lean up against the railing , laugh softly to himself . " english terrier be fond of nose worm , " he remark at last . " when we bring them out to they use to trot off into the jungle and begin sniff at what they imagine to be worm there . but the worm turn out to be a venomous snake , and so poor doggy play no more . i think you will find yourself in a somewhat analogous position if you do n't look out . " " you surely do n't mean to cast an aspersion upon your own daughter ? " i say , flush with indignation . " oh , be all right , " he answer carelessly . " our family be not exactly one , however , which i should recommend a young fellow to marry into . and pray how be it that i be not inform of this snug little arrangement of yours ? " " we be afraid , sir , that you might separate us , " i reply , feel that perfect candour be the good policy under the circumstance . " it be possible that we be mistake . before come to any final decision , i implore you to remember that the happiness of both of us be at stake . it be in your power to divide our body , but our soul shall be for ever unite . " " my good fellow , " say the general , in a not unkindly tone , " you do n't know what you be ask for . there be a gulf between you and any one of the blood of which can never be bridge over . " all trace of anger have vanish now from his manner , and give place to an air of somewhat contemptuous amusement . my family pride take fire at his word . " the gulf may be less than you imagine , " i say coldly . " we be not clodhopper because we live in this out-of-the-way place . i be of noble descent on one side , and my mother be a of . i assure you that there be no such disparity between us as you seem to imagine . " " you misunderstand me , " the general answer . " it be on our side that the disparity lie . there be reason why my daughter should live and die single . it would not be to your advantage to marry her . " " but surely , sir , " i persist , " i be the good judge of my own interest and advantage . since you take this ground all become easy , for i do assure you that the one interest which override all other be that i should have the woman i love for my wife . if this be your only objection to our match you may surely give us your consent , for any danger or trial which i may incur in marry will not weigh with me one featherweight . " " here be a young bantam ! " exclaim the old soldier , smile at my warmth . " it be easy to defy danger when you do n't know what the danger be . " " what be it , then ? " i ask , hotly . " there be no earthly peril which will drive me from 's side . let me know what it be and test me . " " no , no . that would never do , " he answer with a sigh , and then , thoughtfully , as if speak his mind aloud : " he have plenty of pluck and be a lad , too . we might do worse than make use of him . " he go on mumble to himself with a vacant stare in his eye as if he have forget my presence . " look here , , " he say presently . " you will excuse me if i speak hastily a little time ago . it be the second time that i have have occasion to apologise to you for the same offence . it n't occur again . i be rather , no doubt , in my desire for complete isolation , but i have good reason for insist on the point . rightly or wrongly , i have get it into my head that some day there might be an organise raid upon my ground . if anything of the sort should occur i suppose i might reckon upon your assistance ? " " with all my heart . " " so that if ever you get a message such as ' come up , ' or even ' , ' you would know that it be an appeal for help , and would hurry up immediately , even if it be in the dead of the night ? " " most certainly i should , " i answer . " but might i ask you what the nature of the danger be which you apprehend ? " " there would be nothing gain by your know . indeed , you would hardly understand it if i tell you . i must bid you good day now , for i have stay with you too long . remember , i count upon you as one of the garrison now . " " one other thing , sir , " i say hurriedly , for he be turn away , " i hope that you will not be angry with your daughter for anything which i have tell you . it be for my sake that she keep it all secret from you . " " all right , " he say , with his cold , inscrutable smile . " i be not such an ogre in the bosom of my family as you seem to think . as to this marriage question , i should advise you as a friend to let it drop altogether , but if that be impossible i must insist that it stand over completely for the present . it be impossible to say what unexpected turn event may take . good-bye . " he plunge into the wood and be quickly out of sight among the dense plantation . thus end this extraordinary interview , in which this strange man have begin by point a loaded pistol at my breast and have end , by partially acknowledge the possibility of my become his future son-in-law . i hardly know whether to be cast down or elate over it . on the one hand he be likely , by keep a close watch over his daughter , to prevent us from communicate as freely as we have do hitherto . against this there be the advantage of have obtain an implied consent to the renewal of my suit at some future date . on the whole , i come to the conclusion as i walk thoughtfully home that i have improve my position by the incident . but this shadowy , unspeakable appear to rise up at every turn , and to hang day and night over the tower of ! rack my brain as i would , i could not conjure up any solution to the problem which be not puerile and inadequate . one fact strike me as be significant . both the father and the son have assure me , independently of each other , that if i be tell what the peril be , i would hardly realise its significance . how strange and bizarre must the fear be which can scarcely be express in intelligible language ! i hold up my hand in the darkness before i turn to sleep that night , and i swear that no power of man or devil should ever weaken my love for the woman whose pure heart i have have the good fortune to win . in make this statement i have purposely couch it in bald and simple language , for fear i should be accuse of colour my narrative for the sake of effect . if , however , i have tell my story with any approach to realism , the reader will understand me when i say that by this time the succession of dramatic incident which have occur have arrest my attention and excite my imagination to the exclusion of all minor topic . how could i plod through the dull routine of an agent 's work , or interest myself in the thatch of this tenant 's bothy or the sail of that one 's boat , when my mind be take up by the chain of event which i have describe , and be still busy seek an explanation for them . go where i would over the countryside , i could see the square , white tower shoot out from among the tree , and beneath that tower this ill-fated family be watch and wait , wait and for what ? that be still the question which stand like an impassable barrier at the end of every train of thought . regard merely as an abstract problem , this mystery of the family have a lurid fascination about it , but when the woman whom i love a thousandfold good than i do myself prove to be so deeply interested in the solution , i feel that it be impossible to turn my thought to anything else until it have be finally clear up . my good father have receive a letter from the laird , date from , which tell us that he have derive much benefit from the change , and that he have no intention of return to for some time . this be satisfactory to all of us , for my father have find such an excellent place for study that it would have be a sore trial to him to return to the noise and tumult of a city . as to my dear sister and myself , there be , as i have show , strong reason still to make us love the moor . in spite of my interview with the perhaps i might say on account of take occasion at least twice a day to walk towards and satisfy myself that all be well there . he have begin by resent my intrusion , but he have end by take me into a sort of , and even by ask my assistance , so i feel that i stand upon a different footing with him than i have do formerly , and that he be less likely to be annoy by my presence . indeed , i meet him pace round the inclosure a few day afterwards , and his manner towards me be civil , though he make no allusion to our former conversation . he appear to be still in an extreme state of nervousness , start from time to time , and gaze furtively about him , with little frightened , dart glance to the right and the left . i hope that his daughter be right in name the fifth of as the turn point of his complaint , for it be evident to me as i look at his gleam eye and quiver hand , that a man could not live long in such a state of nervous tension . i find on examination that he have have the loose rail securely fasten so as to block up our former , and though i prowl round the whole long line of fencing , i be unable to find any other place where an entrance could be effect . here and there between the few chink leave in the barrier i could catch glimpse of the , and once i see a , middle-aged man standing at a window on the low floor , whom i suppose to be , the coachman . there be no sign , however , of or of , and their absence alarm me . i be convince that , unless they be under some restraint , they would have manage to communicate with my sister or myself . my fear become more and more acute as day follow day without our see or hear anything of them . one be the second day of be walk towards the , hope that i might be fortunate enough to learn some news of my darling , when i observe a man perch upon a stone at the side of the road . as i come near to him i could see that he be a stranger , and from his dusty clothes and dilapidated appearance he seem to have come from a distance . he have a great hunch of bread on his knee and a clasp-knife in his hand , but he have apparently just finish his breakfast , for he brush the crumb off his lap and rise to his foot when he perceive me . notice the great height of the fellow and that he still hold his weapon , i keep well to the other side of the road , for i know that destitution make man desperate and that the chain that glitter on my waistcoat might be too great a temptation to him upon this lonely highway . i be confirm in my fear when i see him step out into the centre of the road and bar my progress . " well , my lad , " i say , affect an ease which i by no mean feel , " what can i do for you this morning ? " the fellow 's face be the colour of mahogany with exposure to the weather , and he have a deep scar from the corner of his mouth to his ear , which by no mean improve his appearance . his hair be grizzle , but his figure be stalwart , and his fur cap be cock on one side so as to give him a rakish , appearance . altogether he give me the impression of be one of the most dangerous type of tramp that i have ever fall in with . instead of reply to my question , he eye me for some time in silence with sullen , eye , and then close his knife with a loud snick . " you be not a beak , " he say , " too young for that , i guess . they have me in chokey at and they have me in chokey at , but by the live thunder if another of them lay a hand on me i will make him remember ! it be a darned fine country this , where they wo n't give a man work , and then lay him by the heel for have no visible means of subsistence . " " i be sorry to see an old soldier so reduce , " say " what corps do you serve in ? " " , . bad cess to the and every one in it ! here i be nigh sixty year of age , with a beggarly pension of pound enough to keep me in beer and baccy . " " i should have think pound ten a year would have be a nice help to you in your old age , " i remark . " would you , though ? " he answer with a sneer , push his weather-beaten face forward until it be within a foot of my own . " how much think that slash with a be worth ? and my foot with all the bone rattle about like a bagful of dice where the trail of the gun go across it . what be that worth , ? and a liver like a sponge , and ague whenever the wind come round to the be the market value of that ? would you take the lot for a dirty forty pound a you now ? " " we be poor folk in this part of the country , " i answer . " you would pass for a rich man down here . " " they be fool folk and they have fool taste , " say he , draw a black pipe from his pocket and stuff it with tobacco . " i know what good living be , and , by ! while i have a shilling in my pocket i like to spend it as a shilling should be spend . i have fight for my country and my country have do darn little for me . i will go to the , so help me ! i could show them how to cross the himalayas so that it would puzzle either afghan or british to stop ' em . what be that secret worth in , , mister ? " " i be ashamed to hear an old soldier speak so , even in jest , " say i sternly . " jest , indeed ! " he cry , with a great , roar oath . " i will have do it year ago if the have be game to take it up . be the good of the bunch , but he have be snuff out . however , that be neither here nor there . what i want to ask you be whether you have ever hear anything in this quarter of a man call , the same who use to be colonel of the bengali ? they tell me at that he live somewhere down this way . " " he live in that large house over yonder , " say i , point to . " you will find the avenue gate a little way down the road , but the general be n't over fond of visitor . " the last part of my speech be lose upon ; for the instant that i point out the gate he set off hop down the road . his mode of progression be the most singular i have ever see , for he would only put his right foot to the ground once in every half-dozen stride , while he work so hard and attain such a momentum with the other limb that he get over the ground at an astonishing speed . i be so surprise that i stand in the roadway gaze after this hulking figure until the thought suddenly strike me that some serious result might come from a meeting between a man of such blunt speech and the choleric , hot-headed general . i therefore follow him as he hop along like some great , clumsy bird , and overtake him at the avenue gate , where he stand grasp the ironwork and peer through at the dark beyond . " he be a sly old jackal , " he say , look round at me and nod his head in the direction of the . " he be a deep old dog . and that be his bungalow , be it , among the tree ? " " that be his house , " i answer ; " but i should advise you to keep a more civil tongue in your head if you intend to speak with the general . he be not a man to stand any nonsense . " " right you be . he be always a hard nut to crack . but be n't this him come down the avenue ? " i look through the gate and see that it be indeed the general , who , have either see us or be attract by our voice , be hurry down towards us . as he advance he would stop from time to time and peer at us through the dark shadow throw by the tree , as if he be irresolute whether to come on or no . " he be reconnoiter ! " whisper my companion with a hoarse chuckle . " he be i know what he be afraid of . he wo n't be catch in a trap if he can help it , the old ' . he be about as fly as they make ' em , you bet ! " then suddenly stand on his and wave his hand through the bar of the gate , he shout at the top of his voice : " come on , my gallant commandant ! come on ! the coast 's clear , and no enemy in sight . " this familiar address have the effect of reassure the general , for he come right for us , though i could tell by his heightened colour that his temper be at boil point . " what , you here , ? " he say , as his eye fall upon me . " what be it you want , and why have you bring this fellow with you ? " " i have not bring him with me , sir , " i answer , feel rather disgust at be make responsible for the presence of the vagabond beside me . " i find him on the road here , and he desire to be direct to you , so i show him the way . i know nothing of him myself . " " what do you want with me , then ? " the general ask sternly , turn to my companion . " if you please , sir , " say the , speak in a whine voice , and touch his moleskin cap with a humility which contrast strangely with the previous rough independence of his bearing , " i be an old gunner in the 's service , sir , and know your name by hear it in i think that maybe you would take me as your groom or gardener , or give me any other place as happen to be vacant . " " i be sorry that i can do anything for you , my man , " the old soldier answer impressively . " then you will give me a little just to help me on my way , sir , " say the cringe mendicant . " you wo n't see an old comrade go to the bad for the sake of a few rupee ? i be with 's brigade in the , sir , and i be at the second taking of . " look keenly at the supplicant , but be silent to his appeal . " i be in with you when the wall be all shake down by an earthquake , and when we find forty thousand afghan within gunshot of us . you ask me about it , and you will see whether i be lie or not . we go through all this when we be young , and now that we be old you be to live in a fine bungalow , and i be to starve by the roadside . it do n't seem to me to be fair . " " you be an impertinent scoundrel , " say the general . " if you have be a good soldier you would never need to ask for help . i shall not give you a farthing . " " one word more , sir , " cry the tramp , for the other be turn away , " i have be in the . " the old soldier spring round as if the word have be a . " mean ? " he stammer . " i have be in the , sir , and i know a man there call . " these last be hiss out in an undertone , and a malicious grin the face of the speaker . their effect upon the general be extraordinary . he fairly stagger back from the gateway , and his yellow countenance blanch to a livid , mottle grey . for a moment he be too overcome to speak . at last he gasp out : " ? who be you who know ? " " take another look , " say the tramp , " your sight be not as keen as it be forty year ago . " the general take a long , earnest look at the unkempt wanderer in front of him , and as he gaze i see the light of recognition spring up in his eye . " bless my soul ! " he cry . " why , it be . " " you have come on it at last , " say the other , chuckle to himself . " i be wonder how long it would be before you know me . and , first of all , just unlock this gate , will you ? it be hard to talk through a grating . it be too much like ten minute with a visitor in the cell . " the general , whose face still bear evidence of his agitation , undo the bolt with nervous , tremble finger . the recognition of have , i fancy , be a relief to him , and yet he plainly show by his manner that he regard his presence as by no mean an unmixed blessing . " why , , " he say , as the gate swing open , " i have often wonder whether you be dead or alive , but i never expect to see you again . how have you be all these long year ? " " how have i be ? " the corporal answer gruffly . " why , i have be drink for the most part . when i draw my money i lie it out in liquor , and as long as that last i get some peace in life . when i be clean out i go upon tramp , partly in the hope of pick up the price of a dram , and partly in order to look for you . " " you will excuse us talk about these private matter , , " the general say , look round at me , for i be begin to move away . " do n't leave us . you know something of this matter already , and may find yourself entirely in the swim with us some of these day . " corporal look round at me in blank astonishment . " in the swim with us ? " he say . " however do he get there ? " " voluntarily , voluntarily , " the general explain , hurriedly sink his voice . " he be a neighbour of mine , and he have volunteer his help in case i should ever need it . " this explanation seem , if anything , to increase the big stranger 's surprise . " well , if that do n't lick cock-fighting ! " he exclaim , contemplate me with admiration . " i never hear tell of such a thing . " " and now you have find me , , " say the tenant of , " what be it that you want of me ? " " why , everything . i want a roof to cover me , and clothes to wear , and food to eat , and , above all , brandy to drink . " " well , i will take you in and do what i can for you , " say the general slowly . " but look here , , we must have discipline . i be the general and you be the corporal ; i be the master and you be the man . now , do n't let me have to remind you of that again . " the tramp draw himself up to his full height and raise his right hand with the palm forward in a military salute . " i can take you on as gardener and get rid of the fellow i have get . as to brandy , you shall have an allowance and no more . we be not deep drinker at the . " " do n't you take opium , or brandy , or nothing yourself , sir ? " ask . " nothing , " the general say firmly . " well , all i can say be , that you have get more nerve and pluck than i shall ever have . i do n't wonder now at your win that in the . if i be to go on listen night after night to them thing without ever take a drop of something to cheer my , it would drive me silly . " put his hand up , as though afraid that his companion might say too much . " i must thank you , , " he say , " for have show this man my door . i would not willingly allow an old comrade , however humble , to go to the bad , and if i do not acknowledge his claim more readily it be simply because i have my doubt as to whether he be really what he represent himself to be . just walk up to the , , and i shall follow you in a minute . " " poor fellow ! " he continue , as he watch the newcomer hobble up the avenue in the ungainly manner which i have describe . " he get a gun over his foot , and it crush the bone , but the obstinate fool would not let the doctor take it off . i remember him now as a smart young soldier in . he and i be associate in some queer adventure , which i may tell you of some day , and i naturally feel sympathy towards him , and would befriend him . do he tell you anything about me before i come ? " " not a word , " i reply . " oh , " say the general carelessly , but with an evident expression of relief , " i think perhaps he might have say something of old time . well , i must go and look after him , or the servant will be frighten , for he be n't a beauty to look at . good-bye ! " with a wave of the hand the old man turn away from me and hurry up the drive after this unexpected addition to his household , while i stroll on round the high , black paling , peer through every chink between the plank , but without see a trace either of or of his sister . i have now bring this statement down to the come of , which will prove to be the beginning of the end . i have set down soberly and in order the event which bring us to , the arrival of the at , the many strange incident which excite first our curiosity and finally our intense interest in that family , and i have briefly touch upon the circumstance which bring my sister and myself into a close and more personal relationship with them . i think that there can be a good moment than this to hand the narrative over to those who have mean of know something of what be go on inside during the month that i be observe it from without . , the coachman , prove to be unable to read or write , but , the of , have copy down his deposition , duly attest by the cross set opposite to his name . the good clergyman have , i fancy , put some slight polish upon the narrator 's story , which i rather regret , as it might have be more interesting , if less intelligible , when report verbatim . it still preserve , however , considerable trace of 's individuality , and may be regard as an exact record of what he see and do while in 's service . ( copy and authenticate by the reverend , of , in ) and the say that i maun tell all i can and his , but that i say muckle ' because the reader care to hear me or my affair . i be na sure o ' that , for the be a family ken and on side o ' the , and there be mony in and as would be please to hear news o ' the son o ' , o ' . i maun e'en do as i be , however , for 's sake , hope he will no forget me when i chance to a favour ask . ( 1 ) i be no able write ' because my send me to scare craw instead o ' ' me school , but on the he bring me up in the and practice o ' the real kirk o ' the , for which may the be praise ! it way last that the factor body , , cam me in the street and whether i be in want o ' a place as a coachman and . as it fall i chance be on the look for something o ' the sort ' at the time , but i quick to let him see that i want it . " can it or leave it , " say he sharp like . " it be a place , and there be mony would be glad . if want it can come up my office at the morn and put your ain question the gentleman . " that be a ' i could get frae him , for he be a close man and a hard one at a shall profit him in the next life , though he lie by a store o ' in this . when the day come there will be a o ' factor on the left hand o ' the throne , and i be surprise if find ' them . , on the morn i up to the office and there i the factor and a lang , thin , dour man ' grey hair and a face as brown and crinkle as a walnut . he look hard at me ' a pair o ' that glow like spunk , and then he say , say he : " you have be bear in these , ' ? " " , " say i , " and never leave them neither . " " never be o ' ? " he . " twice to fair , " say i , for i be a man love the truth ; and besides i ken that the factor would mind my there , for i bargain fur steer and a stirk that he want for the ' o ' the . " i learn frae , " say him it be and canna write . " " , " say " nor read ? " " , " say " it seem me , " say he , ' the factor , " that this be the man i want . servant be spoil , " say he , " by muckle . i , , that will suit me well enough . will three a month and a ' , but i shall the right o ' ' ' notice at any time . how will that suit ? " " it be different frae my last place , " say i , . and the word be true enough , for auld only give me a a month and twice a day . " , , " say he , " maybe we will gie a rise if suit . meanwhile here be the ' that tell me it be the custom give , and i shall ' see at on . " when the cam i walk , and a great muckle it be , ' a window or , and space enough hide ' half the parish . as , there be no for me work at , and the horse be never take o ' the stable frae week 's end week 's end . i be busy enough for a ' that , for there be a deal o ' fencing be put up , and one thing or , forbye ' the knife and ' the boot and job as be fit for an auld wife than for a grow man . there be besides ' in the kitchen , the cook , and the , , benighted being o ' them , have waste a ' their life in , and ken the or the way o ' the flesh . i muckle say to them , for they be simple folk who could scarce understand english , and have hardly regard for their ain soul than the tod on the moor . when the cook say she think muckle o ' , and the that she give hear the discourse o ' o ' the true kirk , i ken it be time for me leave them a high . there be four in family , the general , my , , and , and it long before i find that a ' just exactly as it should be . my be as thin and as white as a , and many be the time as i have come on her and find her ' and ' all by ' . i have watch her walkin ' up and in the wood where she think could see her and ' her like one dement . there be the young gentleman , , and his seem to some trouble on their mind , and the general of a ' , for the be up day and down ; but he be aye the same , ' a face as dour and sad as a felon when he feel the tow his neck . i o ' the hussy in the kitchen whether they ken what be amiss ' the family , but the cook she answer me back that it for her inquire into the affair o ' her superior , and that it be to her as long as she do her work and have her wage . they be , feckless body , the o ' them , and would scarce gie an answer a question , though they could clack when they have a mind . , week pass into month and a ' thing grow instead o ' good in the . the general he get , and his melancholy every day , and yet there any quarrel or bicker between them , for when they have be in the breakfast room i use often gang round and prune the alongside o ' the window , so that i help ' a great o ' their conversation , though against the grain . when the young folk be ' them they would speak little , but when they have go they would aye talk as if some ' trial ere to fa ' upon them , though i could never gather from their word what it be that they be afeared o ' . i have hear the general say than that he o ' death , or any danger that he could face and have do ' , but that it be the lang , weary ' and the uncertainty that have take a ' the strength and the mettle o ' him . then my would console him and tell him that maybe it as bad as he , and that a ' would come in the a ' her cheery word be clean away upon him . as the young folk , i ken that they bide in the , and that they be ' whenever they get a chance ' , but the general be too ' o ' his ain trouble ken it , and it seem me that it be o ' my duty either as coachman or as mind the bairn . he should have that if forbid a lassie and a laddie to anything it be just the sure way o ' ' it . the that in the o ' , and there be no muckle change between the folk in and the folk in . there be thing that i speak yet , but that should be set . the general share his room ' his wife , but sleep a ' in a chamber at the far end o ' the , as distant as possible frae every one else . this room be aye when he in it , and be ever allow gang into it . he would ' his ain bed , and red it up and dust it a ' by ' , but he so much as allow one o ' us to set on the passage that lead it . at he would walk a ' the , and he have lamp hang in every room and corner , so that no should be dark . many be the time frae my room in the garret i have hear his ' and ' , ' and ' one passage and up frae midnight till . it be weary to lie ' his clatter and ' whether he be clean daft , or whether maybe he will pagan and idolatrous trick in , and that his conscience be like the worm which and not . i have ' frae him whether it ease him to speak ' the holy , but it might ' be a mistake , and the general a man that you will care ' a mistake ' . day i be workin ' at the grass border when he come up and he say , say he : " do ever have occasion fire a pistol , ? " " ! " say i , " i never have a thing in my in my life . " " then you will well not begin , " say he . " every man his ain , " he say . " now i warrant could do something ' a cudgel ! " " , could i , " i answer blithely , " as well as lad on the . " " this be a lonely , " say he , " and we might be molest by some rascal . it be be ready for whatever may come . me and you and my son and of , who would come if he be require , ought be able show a think ? " " ' , sir , " i say , " ' be aye good than if will raise me a a month , i will no ' shirk my share o ' either . " " we wo n't quarrel that , " say he , and agree the extra ' a year as easy as though it be as many bawbee . far be it frae me think evil , but i help ' at the time that money that be so lightly ' be maybe no ' so very honestly cam by . i be no ' a curious or a ' mun by nature , but i be puzzle in my ain mind tell why it be that the general walk at and what keep him frae his sleep . , day i be ' the passage when my fall on a great muckle heap o ' curtain and auld and sic ' like thing that be pile away in a corner , no far frae the door o ' the general 's room . ' o ' a sudden a come my and i say ' : " , laddie , " say i , " what be stop frae ' behind that this and ' the auld mun when he ken human be on him ? " the i the it appear , and i make up my mind put the idea instant execution . when the cam i the that i be bad ' the , and would gang my room . i ken fine when i get there that there be na chance o ' ' me , so i wait a wee while , and then when a ' be quiet , i my boot and run the stair until i cam the heap o ' auld clothes , and there i lie ' ' through a kink and a ' the rest cover up ' a great , ragged . there i bide as quiet as a mouse until the general pass me on his road bed , and a ' be still in the . my ! i gang through ' it again for a ' the at the of , i canna think ' a ' the way my back . it be just ' ' there in the silence , ' and ' ' never a break the monotony , except the heavy ' o ' an auld clock somewhere the passage . first i would look the corridor in the one way , and syne i will look in , but it aye seem to me as though there be something come up frae the side that i lookin ' at . i have a sweat on my , and my be ' twice tick o ' the clock , and what fear me most of a ' be that the dust frae the curtain and thing be aye ' my lung , and it be a ' i could keep ' frae ' . ! i wonder my hair grey ' a ' that i go through . i it again to be make o ' . , it may have be o'clock in the ' or maybe a little , and i be just ' that i see after i very sorry all o ' a sudden a cam my ear clear and distinct through the stillness o ' the . i have be ask afore describe that , but i have aye that it be no ' easy gie a clear idea , though it be unlike any other that ever i hearken . it be a , ' clang , like what could be cause by ' the rim o ' a wineglass , but it be far high and thin than that , and have in it , , a kind o ' splash , like the tinkle o ' a a water-butt . in my fear i sit up my , like a among , and i listen ' a ' my ear . ' be still again , except for the dull ' o ' the distant clock . suddenly the cam again , as clear , as shrill , as as ever , and this time the general hear it , for i hear him gie a kind o ' groan , as a tired man might have be roose o ' his sleep . he get up frae his bed , and i could make a rustle noise , as though he be ' ' , and presently his ' as he begin walk up and in his room . ! it lang for me the again and cover ' . there i lay ' in every limb , and ' as prayer as i could mind , ' my still ' through the , and fix upon the door o ' the general 's room . i hear the rattle o ' the handle presently , and the door swing slowly open . there be a ' in the room beyond , an ' i could just catch a glimpse o ' what seem me like a row o ' sword stick the side o ' the ' , when the general step and shut the door behind him . he be dress in a ' goon , ' a red on his , and a pair o ' slipper ' the heel cut off and the turn up . for a moment it cam into my hold that maybe he be walkin ' in his sleep , but as he cam towards me i could see the glint o ' the in his e'en , and his face be a ' ' , like a man that be in distress o ' mind . on my conscience , it gie me the shake when i think o ' his tall figure and his face ' solemn and silent the lang , lone passage . i my breath and lay close ' him , but just as he cam where i be my stand still in my breast , for " ting ! " -- and clear , within a o ' me cam the ' , ' that i have . where it cam frae be than i can tell or what be the cause . it might ' be that the general make it , but i be puzzle tell , for his be by his side as he pass me . it cam frae his direction , certainly , but it appear me come frae his , but it be a thin , eerie , high-pitched , uncanny kind o ' that it easy say just exactly where it do come frae . the general heed , but walk on and be soon o ' , and i lose a minute in ' frae my ' place and ' ' back my room , and if a ' the bogey in the be ' up and the hale through , i never put my again a glimpse o ' them . i say a word anybody what i have see , but i make up my mind that i stay muckle lang at ' . four a month be a good wage , but it enough pay a man for the loss o ' his peace o ' mind , and maybe the loss o ' his soul as , for when the deil be canna tell what sort o ' a trap he may lay for , and though they say that be strong than him , it be maybe as no ' to risk it . it be clear me that the general and his be under some curse , and it be fit that that curse should fa ' on them that have earn it , and no ' on a righteous presbyterian , have ever tread the narrow path . my be for young she be a and winsome for a ' that , i feel that my duty be ' and that i should gang forth , even as ganged o ' the wicked city o ' the plain . that ' be aye ' in my lug , and i bear to be in the passage for fear o ' ' it again . i only want a chance or an excuse gie the general notice , and gang back to some place where i could see christian folk , and have the kirk within a fa ' back upon . but it prove be ordain that , instead o ' my say the word , it should come frae the general ' . it be day the beginning of , i be ' o ' the stable , after ' its oats the horse , when i seed a great muckle loon come ' on leg up the drive , like a big , craw than a man . when i clap my on him i that maybe this be of the rascal that the have be ' , so ado i fetch my bit stick with the intention o ' ' it upon the 's . he seed me ' towards him , and ' my intention frae my look maybe , or frae the stick in my hand , he a lang knife frae his pocket and swear ' the most ' oath that if i ' back he will be the death o ' me . conscience ! the word the use be ' the hair stand straight on your . i wonder he strike where he stand . we be still standin ' opposite each ' his knife and me ' the the general he cam up the drive and us . my surprise he begin talk the stranger as if he have ken him a ' his day . " put your knife in your pocket , , " say he . " your fear have turn your brain . " " blood an ' wound ! " say the other . " he have ' turn my brain some purpose ' that muckle stick o ' his if i draw my snickersnee . you keep an auld savage on your premise . " the he and look black at him , as though he relish advice ' frae such a source . then ' wo n't be want after , , " he say ; " you have be a servant , and i ' complain of ' , but circumstance have arise which will cause me change my arrangement . " " , sir , " say " you can go this evening , " say he , " and you shall have an extra month 's pay up for this short notice . " ' that he go the , follow by the man that he the corporal , and frae that day this i have never clap either on the or the . my money be send me in an envelope , and ' say a few ' word the cook and the wench ' reference the wrath come and the treasure that be rich than ruby , i shake the dust o ' frae my foot for ever . say i express an as what cam afterwards , but maun confine ' what i see ' . doubt he have his reason for far be it frae me hint that they be no ' i maun say this , that what happen surprise me . it be just as i , and so i say . i have a ' it , and i a word add or withdraw . i be muckle for ' it a ' in ' for me , and if there be would wish o ' me i be well ken and in , and , the factor o ' , can aye tell where i be be . ( 1 ) the old rascal be well pay for his trouble , so he need not have make such a favour of it . -- . have give the statement of in , i shall append a short memorandum from , now practise at . it be true that the doctor be only once within the wall of during its tenancy by , but there be some circumstance connect with this visit which make it valuable , especially when consider as a supplement to the experience which i have just submit to the reader . the doctor have find time amid the call of a busy country practice to jot down his recollection , and i feel that i can do well than subjoin them exactly as they stand . i have very much pleasure in furnish with an account of my solitary visit to , not only on account of the esteem which i have form for that gentleman ever since his residence at , but also because it be my conviction that the fact in the case of be of such a singular nature that it be of the high importance that they should be place before the public in a trustworthy manner . it be about the beginning of of last year that i receive a note from , of , desire me to make a professional call upon her husband , whose health , she say , have be for some time in a very unsatisfactory state . i have hear something of the and of the strange seclusion in which they live , so that i be very much please at this opportunity of make their close acquaintance , and lose no time in comply with her request . i have know the in the old day of , the original proprietor , and i be astonish on arrive at the avenue gate to observe the change which have take place . the gate itself , which use to yawn so hospitably upon the road , be now bar and lock , and a high wooden fence , with nail upon the top , encircle the whole ground . the drive itself be and uncared-for , and the whole place have a depressing air of neglect and decay . i have to knock twice before a open the door and show me through a dingy hall into a small room , where sit an elderly , careworn lady , who introduce herself as . with her pale face , her grey hair , her sad , colourless eye , and her fade silk dress , she be in perfect keep with her melancholy surroundings . " you find us in much trouble , doctor , " she say , in a quiet , refined voice . " my poor husband have have a great deal to worry him , and his nervous system for a long time have be in a very weak state . we come to this part of the country in the hope that the brace air and the quiet would have a good effect upon him . instead of improve , however , he have seem to grow weak , and this morning he be in a high fever and a little incline to be delirious . the child and i be so frighten that we send for you at once . if you will follow me i will take you to the general 's bedroom . " she lead the way down a series of corridor to the chamber of the sick man , which be situate in the extreme wing of the building . it be a , room , scantily furnish with a small truckle bed , a campaigning chair , and a plain deal table , on which be scatter numerous paper and book . in the centre of this table there stand a large object of irregular outline , which be cover over with a sheet of linen . all round the wall and in the corner be arrange a very choice and varied collection of arm , principally sword , some of which be of the straight pattern in common use in the , while among the other be scimitar , , , and a score of other specimen of oriental workmanship . many of these be richly mount , with inlaid sheath and hilt sparkling with precious stone , so that there be a piquant contrast between the simplicity of the apartment and the wealth which glitter on the wall . i have little time , however , to observe the general 's collection , since the general himself lie upon the couch and be evidently in sore need of my service . he be lie with his head turn half away from us . breathe heavily , and apparently unconscious of our presence . his bright , stare eye and the deep , hectic flush upon his cheek show that his fever be at its height . i advance to the bedside , and , stoop over him , i place my finger upon his pulse , when immediately he spring up into the sit position and strike at me frenziedly with his clench hand . i have never see such intensity of fear and horror stamp upon a human face as appear upon that which be now glare up at me . " bloodhound ! " he yell ; " let me me go , i say ! keep your hand off me ! be it not enough that my life have be ruin ? when be it all to end ? how long be i to endure it ? " " , dear , hush ! " say his wife in a soothing voice , pass her cool hand over his heated forehead . " this be , from . he have not come to harm you , but to do you good . " the general drop wearily back upon his pillow , and i could see by the change expression of his face that his delirium have leave him , and that he understand what have be say . i slip my clinical thermometer into his armpit and count his pulse rate . it amount to @card@ per minute , and his temperature prove to be @card@ degree . clearly it be a case of remittent fever , such as occur in man who have spend a great part of their life in the tropic . " there be no danger , " i remark . " with a little quinine and arsenic we shall very soon overcome the attack and restore his health . " " no danger , ? " he say . " there never be any danger for me . i be as hard to kill as the . i be quite clear in the head now , ; so you may leave me with the doctor . " leave the unwillingly , as i i sit down by the bedside to listen to anything which my patient might have to communicate . " i want you to examine my liver , " he say when the door be close . " i use to have an abscess there , and , the , say that it be ten to one that it would carry me off . i have not feel much of it since i leave the . this be where it use to be , just under the angle of the rib . " " i can find the place , " say i , after make a careful examination ; " but i be happy to tell you that the abscess have either be entirely absorb , or have turn calcareous , as these solitary abscess will . there be no fear of its do you any harm now . " he seem to be by no mean overjoy at the intelligence . " thing always happen so with me , " he say moodily . " now , if another fellow be feverish and delirious he would surely be in some danger , and yet you will tell me that i be in none . look at this , now . " he bare his chest and show me a pucker wound over the region of the heart . " that be where the bullet of a go in . you would think that be in the right spot to settle a man , and yet what do it do but glance upon a rib , and go clean round and out at the back , without so much as penetrate what you medico call the pleuron . do ever you hear of such a thing ? " " you be certainly bear under a lucky star , " i observe , with a smile . " that be a matter of opinion , " he answer , shake his head . " death have no terror for me , if it will but come in some familiar form , but i confess that the anticipation of some strange , some preternatural form of death be very terrible and unnerving . " " you mean , " say i , rather puzzle at his remark , " that you would prefer a natural death to a death by violence ? " " no , i do n't mean that exactly , " he answer . " i be too familiar with cold steel and lead to be afraid of either . do you know anything about force , doctor ? " " no , i do not , " i reply , glance sharply at him to see if there be any sign of his delirium return . his expression be intelligent , however , and the feverish flush have fade from his cheek . " ah , you western scientific man be very much behind the day in some thing , " he remark . " in all that be material and conducive to the comfort of the body you be pre-eminent , but in what concern the subtle force of and the latent power of the human spirit your good man be century behind the humble coolie of . countless generation of , comfort loving ancestor have give our animal instinct the command over our spiritual one . the body , which should have be a mere tool for the use of the soul , have now become a degrading prison in which it be confine . the oriental soul and body be not so weld together as ours be , and there be far less wrench when they part in death . " " they do not appear to derive much benefit from this peculiarity in their organisation , " i remark incredulously . " merely the benefit of superior knowledge , " the general answer . " if you be to go to , probably the very first thing you would see in the way of amusement would be a native do what be call the mango trick . of course you have hear or read of it . the fellow plant a mango seed , and make pass over it until it sprout and bear leave and in the space of half-an-hour . it be not really a be a power . these man know more than your or do about 's process , and they can accelerate or retard her working by subtle mean of which we have no conception . these they be mere vulgar dabbler , but the man who have tread the high path be as far superior to us in knowledge as we be to the hottentot or . " " you speak as if you be well acquaint with them , " i remark . " to my cost , i be , " he answer . " i have be bring in contact with them in a way in which i trust no other poor chap ever will be . but , really , as regard force , you ought to know something of it , for it have a great future before it in your profession . you should read 's ' research on and , ' and 's ' on . ' these , supplement by the aphorism of , and the work of , of , would enlarge your idea . " i do not particularly relish have a course of reading prescribe for me on a subject connect with my own profession , so i make no comment , but rise to take my departure . before do so i feel his pulse once more , and find that the fever have entirely leave him in the sudden , unaccountable fashion which be peculiar to these malarious type of disease . i turn my face towards him to congratulate him upon his improvement , and stretch out my hand at the same time to pick my glove from the table , with the result that i raise not only my own property , but also the linen cloth which be arrange over some object in the centre . i might not have notice what i have do have i not see an angry look upon the invalid 's face and hear him utter an impatient exclamation . i at once turn , and replace the cloth so promptly that i should have be unable to say what be underneath it , beyond have a general impression that it look like a . " all right , doctor , " the general say good-humouredly , perceive how entirely accidental the incident be . " there be no reason why you should not see it , " and stretch out his hand , he pull away the linen cover for the second time . i then perceive that what i have take for a be really an admirably execute model of a lofty range of mountain , whose snow-clad peak be not unlike the familiar sugar pinnacle and minaret . " these be the himalayas , or at least the branch of them , " he remark , " show the principal pass between and . it be an excellent model . this ground have a special interest for me , because it be the scene of my first campaign . there be the pass opposite and the valley , where i be engage during the summer of @card@ in protect the convoy and keep the in order . it be n't a sinecure , i promise you . " " and this , " say i , indicate a blood-red spot which have be mark on one side of the pass which he have point be the scene of some fight in which you be engage . " " yes , we have a skirmish there , " he answer , lean forward and look at the red mark . " we be attack -- " at this moment he fall back upon his pillow as if he have be shoot , while the same look of horror come over his face which i have observe when i first enter the room . at the same instant there come , apparently from the air immediately above his bed , a sharp , ringing , tinkle sound , which i can only compare with the noise make by a bicycle alarm , though it differ from this in have a distinctly throb character . i have never , before or since , hear any sound which could be confound with it . i stare round in astonishment , wonder where it could have come from , but without perceive anything to which it could be ascribe . " it be all right , doctor , " the general say with a ghastly smile . " it be only my private gong . perhaps you have good step downstairs and write my prescription in the dining-room . " he be evidently anxious to get rid of me , so i be force to take my departure , though i would gladly have stay a little longer , in the hope of learn something as to the origin of the mysterious sound . i drive away from the house with the full determination of call again upon my interesting patient , and endeavour to elicit some further particular as to his past life and his present circumstance . i be destine , however , to be disappoint , for i receive that very even a note from the general himself , enclose a handsome fee for my single visit , and inform me that my treatment have do him so much good that he consider himself to be convalescent , and would not trouble me to see him again . this be the last and only communication which i ever receive from the tenant of . i have be ask frequently by neighbour and other who be interested in the matter whether he give me the impression of insanity . to this i must unhesitatingly answer in the negative . on the contrary , his remark give me the idea of a man who have both read and think deeply . i observe , however , during our single interview , that his reflex be feeble , his well mark , and his artery sign that his constitution be in an unsatisfactory condition , and that a sudden crisis might be apprehend . have throw this upon my narrative , i can now resume the statement of my own personal experience . these i have bring down , as the reader will doubtless remember , to the date of the arrival of the wanderer who call himself . this incident occur about the beginning of the month of , and i find upon a comparison of date that 's visit to precede it by three week or more . during all this time i be in sore distress of mind , for i have never see anything either of or of her brother since the interview in which the general have discover the communication which be keep up between us . i have no doubt that some sort of restraint have be place upon them ; and the thought that we have bring trouble on their head be a bitter one both to my sister and myself . our anxiety , however , be considerably mitigate by the receipt , a couple of day after my last talk with the general , of a note from . this be bring us by a little , ragged urchin , the son of one of the fisherman , who inform us that it have be hand to him at the avenue gate by an old , i expect , must have be the cook . " my , " it run , " and i have grieve to think how concerned you must be at have neither hear from nor see us . the fact be that we be compel to remain in the house . and this compulsion be not physical but moral . " our poor father , who get more and more nervous every day , have entreat us to promise him that we will not go out until after the fifth of , and to allay his fear we have give him the desire pledge . on the other hand , he have promise us that after the be , in less than a shall be as free as air to come or go as we please , so we have something to look forward to . " say that she have explain to you that the governor be always a change man after this particular date , on which his fear reach a crisis . he apparently have more reason than usual this year to anticipate that trouble be brew for this unfortunate family , for i have never know him to take so many elaborate precaution or appear so thoroughly unnerve . who would ever think , to see his bent form and his shake hand , that he be the same man who use some few short year ago to shoot tiger on foot among the jungle of the , and would laugh at the more timid sportsman who seek the protection of their elephant 's howdah ? " you know that he have the , which he win in the street of , and yet here he be shiver with terror and start at every noise , in the most peaceful corner of the world . oh , the pity of it . ! remember what i have already tell it be no fanciful or imaginary peril , but one which we have every reason to suppose to be most real . it be , however , of such a nature that it can neither be avert nor can it profitably be express in word . if all go well , you will see us at on the sixth . " with our fond love to both of you , i be ever , my dear friend , your attached " . " this letter be a great relief to us as let us know that the brother and sister be under no physical restraint , but our powerlessness and inability even to comprehend what the danger be which threaten those whom we have come to love good than ourselves be little short of madden . fifty time a day we ask ourselves and ask each other from what possible quarter this peril be to be expect , but the more we think of it the more hopeless do any solution appear . in vain we combine our experience and piece together every word which have fall from the lip of any inmate of which might be suppose to bear directly or indirectly upon the subject . at last , weary with fruitless speculation , we be fain to try to drive the matter from our thought , console ourselves with the reflection that in a few more day all restriction would be remove , and we should be able to learn from our friend ' own lip . those few intervene day , however , would , we fear , be dreary , long one . and so they would have be , have it not be for a new and most unexpected incident , which divert our mind from our own trouble and give them something fresh with which to occupy themselves . the third of have break auspiciously with a bright sun and a cloudless sky . there have in the morning be a slight breeze , and a few little white wreath of vapour drift here and there like the scattered feather of some gigantic bird , but , as the day wear on , such wind as there be fell completely away , and the air become close and stagnant . the sun blaze down with a degree of heat which be remarkable so late in the season , and a shimmer haze lie upon the upland moor and conceal the irish mountain on the other side of the . the sea itself rise and fall in a long , heavy , oily roll , sweep slowly landward , and break sullenly with a dull , monotonous booming upon the shore . to the inexperienced all seem calm and peaceful , but to those who be accustom to read 's warning there be a dark menace in air and sky and sea . my sister and i walk out in the afternoon , saunter slowly along the margin of the great , sandy spit which shoot out into the , flank upon one side the magnificent of , and on the other the more obscure inlet of , on the shore of which the property be situate . it be too sultry to go far , so we soon seat ourselves upon one of the sandy hillock , overgrow with fade , which extend along the , and which form 's dyke against the encroachment of the ocean . our rest be soon interrupt by the scrunch of heavy boot upon the shingle , and , the old 's man whom i have already have occasion to mention , make his appearance , with the flat , circular net upon his back which he use for . he come towards us upon see us , and say in his rough , kindly way that he hope we would not take it amiss if he send us up a dish of shrimp for our tea at . " i aye make a good catch before a storm , " he remark . " you think there be go to be a storm , then ? " i ask . " why , even a marine could see that , " he answer , stick a great wedge of tobacco into his cheek . " the moor over near be just white ' gull and . what think they come ashore for except to escape have all the feather blow out o ' them ? i mind a day like this when i be ' off . it well-nigh blow us under the gun of the fort , for all our engine and propeller . " " have you ever know a wreck in these part ? " i ask . " love , sir , it be a famous place for wreck . why , in that very bay down there two o ' 's founder ' all hand in the day o ' the spanish war . if that sheet o ' water and the o ' round the corner could tell their ain tale they will have a lot to speak of . when the come round that water will be just bubble ' the number o ' folk that will be come up frae the bottom . " " i trust that there will be no wreck while we be here , " say earnestly . the old man shake his grizzled head and look distrustfully at the hazy horizon . " if it blow from the west , " he say , " some o ' these sailing ship may find it no joke to be catch without in the . there be that barque out her would be glad enough to find ' safe in the . " " she seem to be absolutely motionless , " i remark , look at the vessel in question , whose black hull and gleam sail rise and fall slowly with the throb of the giant pulse beneath her . " perhaps , , we be wrong , and there will be no storm after all . " the old sailor chuckle to himself with an air of superior knowledge , and shuffle away with his , while my sister and i walk slowly homewards through the hot and stagnant air . i go up to my father 's study to see if the old gentleman have any instruction as to the estate , for he have become engross in a new work upon oriental literature , and the practical management of the property have in consequence devolve entirely upon me . i find him seat at his square library table , which be so heap with book and paper that nothing of him be visible from the door except a tuft of white hair . " my dear son , " he say to me as i enter , " it be a great grief to me that you be not more conversant with . when i be your age , i could converse not only in that noble language , but also in the , , , , and dialect , which be all offshoot from the turanian branch . " " i regret extremely , sir , " i answer , " that i have not inherit your wonderful talent as a polyglot . " " i have set myself a task , " he explain , " which , if it could only be continue from generation to generation in our own family until it be complete , would make the name of west immortal . this be nothing less than to publish an english translation of the buddhist , with a preface give an idea of the position of before the come of . with diligence it be possible that i might be able myself to complete part of the preface before i die . " " and pray , sir , " i ask , " how long would the whole work be when it be finish ? " " the abridge edition in the of , " say my father , rub his hand together , " consist of @card@ volume of an average weight of five pound . then the preface , which must embrace some account of the , the , the , and the , with the , could hardly be complete in less than ten volume . now , if we apportion one volume to each year , there be every prospect of the family come to an end of its task about the date @card@ , the twelfth generation complete the work , while the thirteenth might occupy itself upon the index . " " and how be our descendant to live , sir , " i ask , with a smile , " during the progress of this great undertaking : " " that be the bad of you , , " my father cry petulantly . " there be nothing practical about you . instead of confine your attention to the work out of my noble scheme , you begin raise all sort of absurd objection . it be a mere matter of detail how our descendant live , so long as they stick to the . now , i want you to go up to the bothy of and see about the thatch , and have write to say that his be bad . you might take in upon your way and ask after it . " i start off upon my errand , but before do so i take a look at the barometer upon the wall . the mercury have sink to the phenomenal point of inch . clearly the old sailor have not be wrong in his interpretation of 's sign . as i return over the moor in the evening , the wind be blow in short , angry puff , and the western horizon be heap with sombre cloud which stretch their long , ragged tentacle right up to the zenith . against their dark background one or two livid , splotch show up malignant and menace , while the surface of the sea have change from the appearance of burnish quicksilver to that of ground glass . a low , moan sound rise up from the ocean as if it know that trouble be in store for it . far out in the i see a single pant , eager steam vessel make its way to , and the large barque which i have observe in the morning still beat about in the offing , endeavour to pass to the northward . at nine o'clock a sharp breeze be blow , at ten it have freshen into a gale , and before midnight the most furious storm be rage which i can remember upon that weather-beaten coast . i sit for some time in our small , sitting-room listen to the screech and howl of the blast and to the rattle of the gravel and pebble as they patter against the window . 's grim orchestra be play its piece with a compass which range from the deep diapason of the thundering surge to the thin shriek of the scattered shingle and the keen piping of frightened sea bird . once for an instant i open the lattice window , but a gust of wind and rain come bluster through , bear with it a great sheet of seaweed , which flap down upon the table . it be all i could do to close it again with a thrust of my shoulder in the face of the blast . my sister and father have retire to their room , but my thought be too active for sleep , so i continue to sit and to smoke by the smoulder fire . what be go on in the now , i wonder ? what do think of the storm , and how do it affect the old man who wander about in the night ? do he welcome these dread force of as be of the same order of thing as his own tumultuous thought ? it be only two day now from the date which i have be assure be to mark a crisis in his fortune . would he regard this sudden tempest as be in any way connect with the mysterious fate which threaten him ? over all these thing and many more i ponder as i sit by the glowing ember until they die gradually out , and the chill night air warn me that it be time to retire . i may have sleep a couple of hour when i be awaken by someone tug furiously at my shoulder . sit up in bed , i see by the dim light that my father be stand by my bedside , and that it be his grasp which i feel on my . " get up , , get up ! " he be cry excitedly . " there be a great ship ashore in the bay , and the poor folk will all be drown . come down , my boy , and let us see what we can do . " the good old man seem to be nearly beside himself with excitement and impatience . i spring from my bed , and be huddle on a few clothes , when a dull , booming sound make itself hear above the howl of the wind and the thunder of the breaker . " there it be again ! " cry my father . " it be their signal gun , poor creature ! and the fisherman be below . put your coat on and the glengarry hat . come , come , every second may mean a human life ! " we hurry down together and make our way to the beach , accompany by a dozen or so of the inhabitant of . the gale have increase rather than moderate , and the wind scream all round us with an infernal clamour . so great be its force that we have to put our shoulder against it , and bear our way through it , while the sand and gravel tingle up against our face . there be just light enough to make out the scud cloud and the white gleam of the breaker , but beyond that all be absolute darkness . we stand ankle deep in the shingle and seaweed , shade our eye with our hand and peer out into the inky obscurity . it seem to me as i listen that i could hear human voice loud in and terror , but amid the wild turmoil of it be difficult to distinguish one sound from another . suddenly , however , a light glimmer in the heart of the tempest , and next instant the beach and sea and wide , toss bay be brilliantly illuminate by the wild glare of a signal light . the ship lie on her beam-ends right in the centre of the terrible reef , hurl over to such an angle that i could see all the planking of her deck . i recognise her at once as be the same barque which i have observe in the in the morning , and the which be nail upside down to the jagged slump of her mizzen proclaim her nationality . every spar and rope and writhe piece of cordage show up hard and clear under the vivid light which splutter and flicker from the high portion of the forecastle . beyond the doomed ship , out of the great darkness come the long , rolling line of big wave , never end , never tire , with a petulant tuft of foam here and there upon their crest . each as it reach the broad circle of unnatural light appear to gather strength and volume and to hurry on more impetuously until with a roar and a jarring crash it spring upon its victim . cling to the weather shroud we could distinctly see ten or a dozen frighten seaman who , when the light reveal our presence , turn their white face towards us and wave their hand imploringly . the poor wretch have evidently take fresh hope from our presence , though it be clear that their own boat have either be wash away or so damage as to render them useless . the sailor who cling to the rigging be not , however , the only unfortunate on board . on the break poop there stand three man who appear to be both of a different race and nature from the cower wretch who implore our assistance . lean upon the shattered they seem to be converse together as quietly and unconcernedly as though they be unconscious of the deadly peril which surround them . as the signal light flicker over them , we could see from the shore that these immutable stranger wear red , and that their face be of a swarthy , type , which proclaim an eastern origin . there be little time , however , for us to take note of such detail . the ship be break rapidly , and some effort must be make to save the poor , sodden group of humanity who implore our assistance . the near lifeboat be in the of , ten long mile away , but here be our own broad , roomy craft upon the shingle , and plenty of brave fisher lad to form a crew . six of us spring to the oar , the other push us off , and we fight our way through the swirling , rage water , stagger and recoil before the great , sweeping billow , but still steadily decrease the distance between the barque and ourselves . it seem , however , that our effort be fate to be in vain . as we mount upon a surge i see a giant wave , top all the other , and come after them like a driver follow a flock , sweep down upon the vessel , curl its great , green arch over the breaking deck . with a rend , rive sound the ship split in two where the terrible , serrate back of the reef be saw into her keel . the , with the break mizzen and the three oriental , sink backwards into deep water and vanish , while the oscillate helplessly about , retain its precarious balance upon the rock . a wail of fear go up from the wreck and be echo from the beach , but by the blessing of she keep afloat until we make our way under her bowsprit and rescue every man of the crew . we have not get half-way upon our return , however , when another great wave sweep the shattered forecastle off the reef , and , extinguish the signal light , hide the wild denouement from our view . our friend upon the shore be loud in congratulation and praise , nor be they backward in welcome and comfort the castaway . they be thirteen in all , as cold and cow a set of mortal as ever slip through 's finger , save , indeed , their captain , who be a hardy , robust man , and who make light of the affair . some be take off to this cottage and some to that , but the great part come back to with us , where we give them such dry clothes as we could lay our hand on , and serve them with beef and beer by the kitchen fire . the captain , whose name be , compress his bulky form into a suit of my own , and come down to the parlour , where he mix himself some grog and give my father and myself an account of the disaster . " if it have n't be for you , sir , and your brave fellow , " he say , smile across at me , " we should be ten fathom deep by this time . as to the , she be a leaky old tub and well insure , so neither the owner nor i be likely to break our heart over her . " " i be afraid , " say my father sadly , " that we shall never see your three passenger again . i have leave man upon the beach in case they should be wash up , but i fear it be hopeless . i see them go down when the vessel split , and no man could have live for a moment among that terrible surge . " " who be they ? " i ask . " i could not have believe that it be possible for man to appear so unconcerned in the face of such imminent peril . " " as to who they be or be , " the captain answer , puff thoughtfully at his pipe , " that be by no mean easy to say . our last port be , in the north of , and there we take them aboard as passenger for . be the name of the young , and it be only with him that i have come in contact , but they all appear to be quiet , inoffensive gentleman . i never inquire their business , but i should judge that they be parsee merchant from whose trade take them to . i could never see why the crew should fear them , and the mate , too , he should have have more sense . " " fear them ! " i ejaculate in surprise . " yes , they have some preposterous idea that they be dangerous shipmate . i have no doubt if you be to go down into the kitchen now you would find that they be all agree that our passenger be the cause of the whole disaster . " as the captain be speak the parlour door open and the mate of the barque , a tall , red-bearded sailor , step in . he have obtain a complete rig-out from some kind-hearted fisherman , and look in his comfortable jersey and a very favourable specimen of a shipwreck mariner . with a few word of grateful acknowledgment of our hospitality , he draw a chair up to the fire and warm his great , brown hand before the blaze . " what think now , ? " he ask presently , glance up at his superior officer . " do n't i warn you what would be the upshot of have those nigger on board the ? " the captain lean back in his chair and laugh heartily . " do n't i tell you ? " he cry , appeal to us . " do n't i tell you ? " " it might have be no laughing matter for us , " the other remark petulantly . " i have lose a good and nearly my life into the bargain . " " do i understand you to say , " say i , " that you attribute your misfortune to your ill-fated passenger ? " the mate open his eye at the adjective . " why ill-fated , sir ? " he ask . " because they be most certainly drown , " i answer . he sniff incredulously and go on warm his hand . " man of that kind be never drown , " he say , after a pause . " their father , the devil , look after them . do you see them stand on the poop and roll cigarette at the time when the mizzen be carry away and the stove ? that be enough for me . i be not surprise at you landsman not be able to take it in , but the captain here , who have be sail since he be the height of the binnacle , ought to know by this time that a cat and a priest be the bad cargo you can carry . if a christian priest be bad , i guess an idolatrous pagan one be fifty time worse . i stand by the old religion , and be to it ! " my father and i could not help laugh at the rough sailor be very unorthodox way of proclaim his orthodoxy . the mate , however , be evidently in deadly earnest , and proceed to state his case , mark off the different point upon the rough , red finger of his left hand . " it be at , directly after they come that i warn , " he say reproachfully to the captain . " there be three buddhist in my watch , and what do they do when them chap come aboard ? why , they down on their stomach and rub their nose on the be what they do . they would n't ' do as much for an admiral of the . they know who 's nigger do ; and i smell mischief the moment i see them on their face . i ask them afterwards in your presence , , why they have do it , and they answer that the passenger be holy man . you hear ' em yourself . " " well , there be no harm in that , , " say . " i do n't know that , " the mate say doubtfully . " the holy christian be the one that be nearest , but the holy nigger be , in my opinion , the one that be nearest the devil . then you see yourself , , how they go on during the voyage , read book that be writ on wood instead o ' paper , and sit up right through the night to jabber together on the quarter-deck . what do they want to have a chart of their own for and to mark the course of the vessel every day ? " " they do n't , " say the captain . " indeed they do , and if i do not tell you sooner it be because you be always ready to laugh at what i say about them . they have instrument o ' their they use them i ca n't every day at noon they work out the latitude and longitude , and mark out the vessel 's position on a chart that be pin on their cabin table . i see them at it , and so do the steward from his pantry . " " well , i do n't see what you prove from that , " the captain remark , " though i confess it be a strange thing . " " i will tell you another strange thing , " say the mate impressively . " do you know the name of this bay in which we be cast away ? " " i have learn from our kind friend here that we be upon the coast , " the captain answer , " but i have not hear the name of the bay . " the mate lean forward with a grave face . " it be the of , " he say . if he expect to astonish he certainly succeed , for that gentleman be fairly bereave of speech for a minute or more . " this be really marvellous , " he say , after a time , turn to us . " these passenger of ours cross-question us early in the voyage as to the existence of a bay of that name . here and i deny all knowledge of one , for on the chart it be include in the of . that we should eventually be blow into it and destroy be an extraordinary coincidence . " " too extraordinary to be a coincidence , " growl the mate . " i see them during the calm yesterday morning , point to the land over our starboard quarter . they know well enough that that be the port they be make for . " " what do you make of it all , then , ? " ask the captain , with a troubled face . " what be your own theory on the matter ? " " why , in my opinion , " the mate answer , " them three swab have no more difficulty in raise a gale o ' wind than i should have in swallow this here grog . they have reason o ' their own for come to this your presence , god-forsaken bay , and they take a short cut to it by arrange to be blow ashore there . that be my idea o ' the matter , though what three buddhist priest could find to do in the of be clean past my comprehension . " my father raise his eyebrow to indicate the doubt which his hospitality forbid him from put into word . " i think , gentleman , " he say , " that you be both sorely in need of rest after your perilous adventure . if you will follow me i shall lead you to your room . " he conduct them with old-fashioned ceremony to the laird 's good spare bedroom , and then , return to me in the parlour , propose that we should go down together to the beach and learn whether anything fresh have occur . the first pale light of dawn be just appear in the east when we make our way for the second time to the scene of the shipwreck . the gale have blow itself out , but the sea be still very high , and all inside the breaker be a seething , gleam line of foam , as though the fierce old ocean be gnash its white fang at the victim who have escape from its clutch . all along the beach fisherman and crofter be hard at work haul up spar and barrel as fast as they be toss ashore . none of them have see any body , however , and they explain to us that only such thing as could float have any chance of come ashore , for the undercurrent be so strong that whatever be beneath the surface must infallibly be sweep out to sea . as to the possibility of the unfortunate passenger have be able to reach the shore , these practical man would not hear of it for a moment , and show us conclusively that if they have not be drown they must have be dash to piece upon the rock . " we do all that could be do , " my father say sadly , as we return home . " i be afraid that the poor mate have have his reason affect by the suddenness of the disaster . do you hear what he say about buddhist priest raise a gale ? " " yes , i hear him , " say " it be very painful to listen to him , " say my father . " i wonder if he would object to my put a small mustard plaster under each of his ear . it would relieve any congestion of the brain . or perhaps it would be well to wake him up and give him two pill . what do you think , ? " " i think , " say i , with a yawn , " that you have well let him sleep , and go to sleep yourself . you can physic him in the morning if he need it . " so say i stumble off to my bedroom , and throw myself upon the couch be soon in a dreamless slumber . it must have be eleven or twelve o'clock before i awake , and it seem to me in the flood of golden light which stream into my chamber that the wild , tumultuous episode of the night before must have form part of some fantastic dream . it be hard to believe that the gentle breeze which whisper so softly among the around my window be cause by the same element which have shake the very house a few short hour before . it be as if have repent of her momentary passion and be endeavour to make amends to an injured world by its warmth and its sunshine . a chorus of bird in the garden below fill the whole air with their wonder and congratulation . down in the hall i find a number of the shipwreck sailor , look all the good for their night 's repose , who set up a buzz of pleasure and gratitude upon see me . arrangement have be make to drive them to , whence they be to proceed to by the evening train , and my father have give order that each should be serve with a packet of sandwich and hard-boiled egg to sustain him on the way . thank us warmly in the name of his employer for the manner in which we have treat them , and he call for three cheer from his crew , which be very heartily give . he and the mate walk down with us after we have break our fast to have a last look at the scene of the disaster . the great bosom of the bay be still heave convulsively , and its wave be break into sob against the rock , but there be none of that wild turmoil which we have see in the early morning . the long , emerald ridge , with their little , white crest of foam , roll slowly and majestically in , to break with a regular pant of a tired monster . a cable length from the shore we could see the mainmast of the barque float upon the wave , disappear at time in the trough of the sea , and then shoot up towards like a giant javelin , shine and drip as the roller toss it about . other small piece of wreckage dot the water , while innumerable spar and package be litter over the sand . these be be draw up and collect in a place of safety by gang of peasant . i notice that a couple of gull be hover and skim over the scene of the shipwreck , as though many strange thing be visible to them beneath the wave . at time we could hear their raucous voice as they cry to one another of what they see . " she be a leaky old craft , " say the captain , look sadly out to sea , " but there be always a feeling of sorrow when we see the last of a ship we have sail in . well , well , she would have be break up in any case , and sell for firewood . " " it look a peaceful scene , " i remark . " who would imagine that three man lose their life last night in those very water ? " " poor fellow , " say the captain , with feeling . " should they be cast up after our departure , i be sure , , that you will have them decently inter . " i be about to make some reply when the mate burst into a loud guffaw , slap his thigh and choke with merriment . " if you want to bury them , " he say , " you have well look sharp , or they may clear out of the country . you remember what i say last night ? just look at the top of that ' ere hillock , and tell me whether i be in the right or not ? " there be a high sand dune some little distance along the coast , and upon the summit of this the figure be standing which have attract the mate 's attention . the captain throw up his hand in astonishment as his eye rest upon it . " by the eternal , " he shout , " it be himself ! let us overhaul him ! " take to his heel in his excitement he race along the beach , follow by the mate and myself , as well as by one or two of the fisherman who have observe the presence of the stranger . the latter , perceive our approach , come down from his post of observation and walk quietly in our direction , with his head sink upon his breast , like one who be absorb in thought . i could not help contrast our hurried and tumultuous advance with the gravity and dignity of this lonely oriental , nor be the matter mend when he raise a pair of steady , thoughtful dark eye and incline his head in a graceful , sweeping salutation . it seem to me that we be like a pack of schoolboy in the presence of a master . the stranger 's broad , unruffled brow , his clear , search gaze , yet sensitive mouth , and clean-cut , resolute expression , all combine to form the most imposing and noble presence which i have ever know . i could not have imagine that such imperturbable calm and at the same time such a consciousness of latent strength could have be express by any human face . he be dress in a brown velveteen coat , loose , dark trouser , with a shirt that be cut low in the collar , so as to show the muscular , brown neck , and he still wear the red fez which i have notice the night before . i observe with a feeling of surprise , as we approach him , that none of these garment show the slight indication of the rough treatment and wet which they must have receive during their wearer 's submersion and struggle to the shore . " so you be none the bad for your duck , " he say in a pleasant , musical voice , look from the captain to the mate . " i hope that your poor sailor have find pleasant quarter . " " we be all safe , " the captain answer . " but we have give you up for and your two friend . indeed , i be just make arrangement for your burial with here . " the stranger look at me and smile . " we wo n't give that trouble for a little time yet , " he remark ; " my friend and i come ashore all safe , and we have find shelter in a hut a mile or so along the coast . it be lonely down there , but we have everything which we can desire . " " we start for this afternoon , " say the captain ; " i shall be very glad if you will come with us . if you have not be in before you may find it awkward travel alone . " " we be very much indebted to you for your thoughtfulness , " answer ; " but we will not take advantage of your kind offer . since have drive us here we intend to have a look about us before we leave . " " as you like , " the captain say , shrug his shoulder . " i do n't think you be likely to find very much to interest you in this hole of a place . " " very possibly not , " answer with an amused smile . " you remember 's line : ' the mind be its own place , and in itself can make a hell of , a heaven of . ' i dare say we can spend a few day here comfortably enough . indeed , i think you must be wrong in consider this to be a barbarous locality . i be much mistake if this young gentleman 's father be not , whose name be know and honour by the pundit of . " " my father be , indeed , a well-known scholar , " i answer in astonishment . " the presence of such a man , " observe the stranger slowly , " change a wilderness into a city . one great mind be surely a high indication of civilisation than be incalculable league of brick and mortar . " your father be hardly so profound as , or so universal as the , but he combine many of the virtue of each . you may tell him , however , from me that he be mistake in the analogy which he have trace between the and word root . " " if you have determine to honour our neighbourhood by a short stay , " say i , " you will offend my father very much if you do not put up with him . he represent the laird here , and it be the laird 's privilege , accord to our scottish custom , to entertain all stranger of repute who visit this parish . " my sense of hospitality prompt me to deliver this invitation , though i could feel the mate twitch at my sleeve as if to warn me that the offer be , for some reason , an objectionable one . his fear be , however , unnecessary , for the stranger signify by a shake of the head that it be impossible for him to accept it . " my friend and i be very much oblige to you , " he say , " but we have our own reason for remain where we be . the hut which we occupy be desert and partly ruin , but we have train ourselves to do without most of those thing which be look upon as necessaries in , believe firmly in that wise axiom that a man be rich , not in proportion to what he have , but in proportion to what he can dispense with . a good fisherman supply us with bread and with herb , we have clean , dry straw for our couch ; what could man wish for more ? " " but you must feel the cold at night , come straight from the tropic , " remark the captain . " perhaps our body be cold sometimes . we have not notice it . we have all three spend many year in the on the border of the region of eternal snow , so we be not very sensitive to inconvenience of the sort . " " at least , " say i , " you must allow me to send you over some fish and some meat from our larder . " " we be not christian , " he answer , " but buddhist of the high school . we do not recognise that man have a moral right to slay an ox or a fish for the gross use of his body . he have not put life into them , and have assuredly no mandate from the to take life from them save under most press need . we could not , therefore , use your gift if you be to send it . " " but , sir , " i remonstrate , " if in this changeable and inhospitable climate you refuse all nourish food your vitality will fail will die . " " we shall die then , " he answer , with an amused smile . " and now , , i must bid you adieu , thank you for your kindness during the voyage , and you , too , will command a ship of your own before the year be out . i trust , , that i may see you again before i leave this part of the country . farewell ! " he raise his red fez , incline his noble head with the stately grace which characterise all his action , and stride away in the direction from which he have come . " let me congratulate you , , " say the captain to the mate as we walk homewards . " you be to command your own ship within the year . " " no such luck ! " the mate answer , with a pleased smile upon his mahogany face , " still , there be no say how thing may come out . what think of him , ? " " why , " say i , " i be very much interested in him . what a magnificent head and bear he have for a young man . i suppose he can be more than thirty . " " forty , " say the mate . " sixty , if he be a day , " remark . " why , i have hear him talk quite familiarly of the first afghan war . he be a man then , and that be close on forty year ago . " " wonderful ! " i ejaculate . " his skin be as smooth and his eye be as clear as mine be . he be the superior priest of the three , no doubt . " " the inferior , " say the captain confidently . " that be why he do all the talk for them . their mind be too elevate to descend to mere worldly chatter . " " they be the strange piece of flotsam and jetsam that be ever throw upon this coast , " i remark . " my father will be mightily interested in them . " " indeed , i think the less you have to do with them the good for you , " say the mate . " if i do command my own ship i will promise you that i never carry live stock of that sort on board of her . but here we be all aboard and the anchor trip , so we must bid you good-bye . " the wagonette have just finish load up when we arrive , and the chief place , on either side of the driver , have be reserve for my two companion , who speedily spring into them . with a chorus of cheer the good fellow whirl away down the road , while my father , , and i stand upon the lawn and wave our hand to them until they disappear behind the wood , en route for the railway station . barque and crew have both vanish now from our little world , the only relic of either be the heap of debris upon the beach , which be to lie there until the arrival of an agent from 's . at dinner that evening i mention to my father the episode of the three buddhist priest , and find , as i have expect , that he be very much interested by my account of them . when , however , he hear of the high manner in which have speak of him , and the distinguished position which he have assign him among philologist , he become so excited that it be all we could do to prevent him from set off then and there to make his acquaintance . and i be relieve and glad when we at last succeed in abstract his boot and manoeuvre him to his bedroom , for the exciting event of the last hour have be too much for his weak frame and delicate nerve . i be sit at the open porch in the gloaming , turn over in my mind the unexpected event which have occur so gale , the wreck , the rescue , and the strange character of the my sister come quietly over to me and put her hand in mine . " do n't you think , , " she say , in her low , sweet voice , " that we be forget our friend over at ? have n't all this excitement drive their fear and their danger out of our head ? " " out of our head , but never out of our heart , " say i , laugh . " however , you be right , little one , for our attention have certainly be distract from them . i shall walk up in the morning and see if i can see anything of them . by the way , be the fateful 5th of more day , and all will be well with us . " " or ill , " say my sister gloomily . " why , what a little croaker you be , to be sure ! " i cry . " what in the world be come over you ? " " i feel nervous and low-spirited , " she answer , draw closer to my side and shiver . " i feel as if some great peril be hang over the head of those we love . why should these strange man wish to stay upon the coast ? " " what , the buddhist ? " i say lightly . " oh , these fellow have continual feast-day and religious rite of all sort . they have some very good reason for stay , you may be sure . " " do n't you think , " say , in an awe-struck whisper , " that it be very strange that these priest should arrive here all the way from just at the present moment ? have you not gather from all you have hear that the general 's fear be in some way connect with and the ? " the remark make me thoughtful . " why , now that you mention it , " i answer , " i have some vague impression that the mystery be connect with some incident which occur in that country . i be sure , however , that your fear would vanish if you see . he be the very personification of wisdom and benevolence . he be shock at the idea of our kill a sheep , or even a fish for his he would rather die than have a hand in take the life of an animal . " " it be very foolish of me to be so nervous , " say my sister bravely . " but you must promise me one thing , . you will go up to in the morning , and if you can see any of them you must tell them of these strange neighbour of ours . they be well able to judge than we be whether their presence have any significance or not . " " all right , little one , " i answer , as we go indoors . " you have be over-excited by all these wild doing , and you need a sound night 's rest to compose you . i will do what you suggest , however , and our friend shall judge for themselves whether these poor fellow should be send about their business or not . " i make the promise to allay my sister 's apprehension , but in the bright sunlight of morning it appear less than absurd to imagine that our poor vegetarian castaway could have any sinister intention , or that their advent could have any effect upon the tenant of . i be anxious , myself , however , to see whether i could see anything of the , so after breakfast i walk up to the . in their seclusion it be impossible for them to have learn anything of the recent event . i feel , therefore , that even if i should meet the general he could hardly regard me as an intruder while i have so much news to communicate . the place have the same dreary and melancholy appearance which always characterise it . look through between the thick iron bar of the main gateway there be nothing to be see of any of the occupant . one of the great scotch fir have be blow down in the gale , and its long , ruddy trunk lie right across the avenue ; but no attempt have be make to remove it . everything about the property have the same air of desolation and neglect , with the solitary exception of the massive and impenetrable fencing , which present as unbroken and formidable an obstacle as ever to the would-be trespasser . i walk round this barrier as far as our old without find any flaw through which i could get a glimpse of the house , for the fence have be repair with each rail overlap the last , so as to secure absolute privacy for those inside , and to block those peep-hole which i have formerly use . at the old spot , however , where i have have the memorable interview with the general on the occasion when he surprise me with his daughter , i find that the two loose rail have be in such a manner that there be a gap of two inch or more between them . through this i have a view of the house and of part of the lawn in front of it , and , though i could see no sign of life outside or at any of the window , i settle down with the intention of stick to my post until i have a chance of speak to one or other of the inmate . indeed , the cold , dead aspect of the house have strike such a chill into my heart that i determine to scale the fence at whatever risk of incur the general 's displeasure rather than return without news of the . happily there be no need of this extreme expedient , for i have not be there half-an-hour before i hear the harsh sound of an opening lock , and the general himself emerge from the main door . to my surprise he be dress in a military uniform , and that not the uniform in ordinary use in the . the red coat be strangely cut and stain with the weather . the trouser have originally be white , but have now fade to a dirty yellow . with a red sash across his chest and a straight sword hang from his side , he stand the live example of a bygone 's officer of forty year ago . he be follow by the , , now and prosperous , who limp along beside his master , the two pace up and down the lawn absorb in conversation . i observe that from time to time one or other of them would pause and glance furtively all about them , as though guard keenly against a surprise . i should have prefer communicate with the general alone , but since there be no dissociate him from his companion , i beat loudly on the fencing with my stick to attract their attention . they both face round in a moment , and i could see from their gesture that they be disturb and alarm . i then elevate my stick above the barrier to show them where the sound proceed from . at this the general begin to walk in my direction with the air of a man who be brace himself up for an effort , but the other catch him by the wrist and endeavour to dissuade him . it be only when i shout out my name and assure them that i be alone that i could prevail upon them to approach . once assure of my identity the general run eagerly towards me and greet me with the utmost cordiality . " this be truly kind of you , , " he say . " it be only at such time as these that one can judge who be a friend and who not . it would not be fair to you to ask you to come inside or to stay any time , but i be none the less very glad to see you . " " i have be anxious about you all , " i say , " for it be some little time since i have see or hear from any of you . how have you all be keep ? " " why , as well as could be expect . but we will be good will be different man , , ? " " yes , sir , " say the corporal , raise his hand to his forehead in a military salute . " we will be right as the bank . " " the corporal and i be a little disturb in our mind just now , " the general explain , " but i have no doubt that all will come right . after all , there be nothing high than , and we be all in his hand . and how have you be , ? " " we have be very busy for one thing , " say " i suppose you have hear nothing of the great shipwreck ? " " not a word , " the general answer listlessly . " i think the noise of the wind would prevent you hear the signal gun . she come ashore in the bay the night before great barque from . " " from ! " ejaculate the general . " yes . her crew be save , fortunately , and have all be send on to . " " all send on ! " cry the general , with a face as bloodless as a corpse . " all except three rather strange character who claim to be buddhist priest . they have decide to remain for a few day upon the coast . " the word be hardly out of my mouth when the general drop upon his knee with his long , thin arm extend to . " will be do ! " he cry in a crack voice . " bless will be do ! " i could see through the crack that 's face have turn to a sickly yellow shade , and that he be wipe the perspiration from his brow . " it be like my luck ! " he say . " after all these year , to come when i have get a snug billet . " " never mind , my lad , " the general say , rise , and square his shoulder like a man who brace himself up for an effort . " be it what it may we will face it as british soldier should . remember at , when you have to run from your gun to our square , and the sikh horse come thunder down on our bayonet ? we do n't flinch then , and we wo n't flinch now . it seem to me that i feel good than i have do for year . it be the uncertainty that be kill me . " " and the infernal , " say the corporal . " well , we all go be some consolation . " " good-bye , , " say the general . " be a good husband to , and give my poor wife a home . i do n't think she will trouble you long . good-bye ! bless you ! " " look here , , " i say , peremptorily break off a piece of wood to make communication more easy , " this sort of thing have be go on too long . what be these hint and allusion and innuendoe ? it be time we have a little plain speaking . what be it you fear ? out with it ! be you in dread of these ? if you be , i be able , on my father 's authority , to have them arrest as rogue and vagabond . " " no , no , that would never do , " he answer , shake his head . " you will learn about the wretched business soon enough . know where to lay his hand upon the paper bear on the matter . you can consult him about it . " " but surely , " i cry , " if the peril be so imminent something may be do to avert it . if you would but tell me what you fear i should know how to act . " " my dear friend , " he say , " there be nothing to be do , so calm yourself , and let thing take their course . it have be folly on my part to shelter myself behind mere barrier of wood and stone . the fact be , that inaction be terrible to me , and i feel that to do anything , however futile , in the nature of a precaution , be good than passive resignation . my humble friend here and i have place ourselves in a position in which , i trust , no poor fellow will ever find himself again . we can only recommend ourselves to the unfailing goodness of the , and trust that what we have endure in this world may lessen our atonement in the world to come . i must leave you now , for i have many paper to destroy and much to arrange . good-bye ! " he push his hand through the hole which i have make , and grasp mine in a solemn farewell , after which he walk back to the with a firm and decide step , still follow by the crippled and sinister corporal . i walk back to much disturb by this interview , and extremely puzzle as to what course i should pursue . it be evident now that my sister 's suspicion be correct , and that there be some very intimate connection between the presence of the three oriental and the mysterious peril which hang over the tower of . it be difficult for me to associate the 's gentle , refined manner and word of wisdom with any deed of violence , yet now that i think of it i could see that a terrible capacity for wrath lie behind his shaggy brow and dark , piercing eye . i feel that of all man whom i have ever meet he be the one whose displeasure i should least care to face . but how could two man so widely dissociate as the foul-mouthed old corporal of artillery and the distinguished anglo-indian general have each earn the ill-will of these strange castaway ? and if the danger be a positive physical one , why should he not consent to my proposal to have the three man place under i confess it would have go much against my grain to act in so inhospitable a manner upon such vague and shadowy ground . these question be absolutely unanswerable , and yet the solemn word and the terrible gravity which i have see in the face of both the old soldier forbid me from think that their fear be entirely unfounded . it be all a absolutely insoluble puzzle . one thing at least be clear to that be that in the present state of my knowledge , and after the general 's distinct prohibition , it be impossible for me to interfere in any way . i could only wait and pray that , whatever the danger might be , it might pass over , or at least that my dear and her brother might be protect against it . i be walk down the lane lose in thought , and have get as far as the wicket gate which open upon the lawn , when i be surprise to hear my father 's voice raise in most animated and excited converse . the old man have be of late so abstract from the daily affair of the world , and so absorb in his own special study , that it be difficult to engage his attention upon any ordinary , mundane topic . curious to know what it be that have draw him so far out of himself , i open the gate softly , and walk quietly round the laurel bush , find him sit , to my astonishment , with none other than the very man who be occupy my thought , , the buddhist . the two be sit upon a garden bench , and the oriental appear to be lay down some weighty proposition , check every point upon his long , quiver , brown finger , while my father , with his hand throw abroad and his face awry , be loud in protestation and in argument . so absorb be they in their controversy , that i stand within a of them for a minute or more before they become conscious of my presence . on observe me the priest spring to his foot and greet me with the same lofty courtesy and dignified grace which have so impress me the day before . " i promise myself yesterday , " he say , " the pleasure of call upon your father . you see i have keep my word . i have even be dare enough to question his view upon some point in connection with the and hindoo tongue , with the result that we have be argue for an hour or more without either of us convince the other . without pretend to as deep a theoretical knowledge as that which have make the name of a household word among oriental scholar , i happen to have give considerable attention to this one point , and indeed i be in a position to say that i know his view to be unsound . i assure you , sir , that up to the year @card@ , or even later , be the ordinary language of the great bulk of the inhabitant of . " " and i assure you , sir , " say my father warmly , " that it be dead and forget at that date , save by the learn , who use it as a vehicle for scientific and religious as be use in the long after it have cease to be speak by any european nation . " " if you consult the you will find , " say , " that this theory , though commonly receive , be entirely untenable . " " and if you will consult the , and more particularly the canonical book on buddhist discipline , " cry my father , " you will find that the theory be unassailable . " " but look at the , " say our visitor earnestly . " and look at , " shout my father triumphantly . " when , in the year @card@ before the christian , mind order the law of to be engrave upon the rock , what language do he employ , ? be it ? -- ! and why be it not ? because the low order of his subject would not have be able to understand a word of it . , ! that be the reason . how be you go to get round 's edict , ? " " he carve them in the various dialect , " answer . " but energy be too precious a thing to be waste in mere wind in this style . the sun have pass its meridian , and i must return to my companion . " " i be sorry that you have not bring them to see us , " say my father courteously . he be , i could see , uneasy lest in the eagerness of debate he have overstep the bound of hospitality . " they do not mix with the world , " answer , rise to his foot . " they be of a high grade than i , and more sensitive to contaminate influence . they be immerse in a six month ' meditation upon the mystery of the third incarnation , which have last with few intermission from the time that we leave the himalayas . i shall not see you again , , and i therefore bid you farewell . your old age will be a happy one , as it deserve to be , and your eastern study will have a lasting effect upon the knowledge and literature of your own country . farewell ! " " and be i also to see no more of you ? " i ask . " unless you will walk with me along the , " he answer . " but you have already be out this morning , and may be tire . i ask too much of you . " " nay , i should be delight to come , " i respond from my heart , and we set off together , accompany for some little distance by my father , who would gladly , i could see , have reopen the controversy , have not his stock of breath be too limit to allow of his talk and walk at the same time . " he be a learned man , " remark , after we have leave him behind , " but , like many another , he be intolerant towards opinion which differ from his own . he will know well some day . " i make no answer to this observation , and we trudge along for a time in silence , keep well down to the water 's edge , where the sand afford a good foothold . the sand dune which line the coast form a continuous ridge upon our left , cut us off entirely from all human observation , while on the right the broad stretch away with hardly a sail to break its silvery uniformity . the buddhist priest and i be absolutely alone with . i could not help reflect that if he be really the dangerous man that the mate affect to consider him , or that might be infer from the word of , i have place myself completely in his power . yet such be the majestic benignity of the man 's aspect , and the unruffled serenity of his deep , dark eye , that i could afford in his presence to let fear and suspicion blow past me as lightly as the breeze which whistle round us . his face might be stern , and even terrible , but i feel that he could never be unjust . as i glance from time to time at his noble profile and the sweep of his jet-black beard , his tweed travel suit strike me with an almost painful sense of incongruity , and i him in my imagination with the grand , sweeping oriental costume which be the fitting and proper frame for such a only garb which do not detract from the dignity and grace of the wearer . the place to which he lead me be a small fisher cottage which have be desert some year before by its tenant , but still stand gaunt and bare , with the thatch partly blow away and the window and door in sad disrepair . this dwelling , which the poor scotch beggar would have shrink from , be the one which these singular man have prefer to the proffer hospitality of the laird 's house . a small garden , now a mass of tangled bramble , stand round it , and through this my acquaintance pick his way to the ruin door . he glance into the house and then wave his hand for me to follow him . " you have now an opportunity , " he say , in a subdued , reverential voice , " of see a spectacle which few european have have the privilege of behold . inside that cottage you will find two who be only one remove from the high plane of . they be both wrap in an ecstatic trance , otherwise i should not venture to obtrude your presence upon them . their astral body have depart from them , to be present at the feast of lamp in the holy of in . tread lightly lest by stimulate their corporeal function you recall them before their devotion be complete . " walk slowly and on tiptoe , i pick my way through the garden , and peer through the open doorway . there be no furniture in the dreary interior , nor anything to cover the uneven floor save a litter of fresh straw in a corner . among this straw two man be crouch , the one small and wizened , the other and gaunt , with their leg cross in oriental fashion and their head sink upon their breast . neither of them look up , or take the small notice of our presence . they be so still and silent that they might have be two bronze statue but for the slow and measured rhythm of their breathing . their face , however , have a peculiar , colour , very different from the healthy brown of my companion be , and i observe , on stoop my head , that only the white of their eye be visible , the ball be turn upwards beneath the lid . in front of them upon a small mat lie an earthenware pitcher of water and of bread , together with a sheet of paper inscribe with certain cabalistic character . glance at these , and then , motion to me to withdraw , follow me out into the garden . " i be not to disturb them until ten o'clock , " he say . " you have now see in operation one of the grand result of our occult philosophy , the dissociation of spirit from body . not only be the spirit of these holy man stand at the present moment by the bank of the gange , but those spirit be clothe in a material cover so identical with their real body that none of the faithful will ever doubt that and be actually among them . this be accomplish by our power of resolve an object into its chemical atom , of convey these atom with a speed which exceed that of lightning to any give spot , and of there them and compel them to retake their original form . of old , in the day of our ignorance , it be necessary to convey the whole body in this way , but we have since find that it be as easy and more convenient to transmit material enough merely to build up an outside shell or semblance . this we have term the astral body . " " but if you can transmit your spirit so readily , " i observe , " why should they be accompany by any body at all ? " " in communicate with brother initiate we be able to employ our spirit only , but when we wish to come in contact with ordinary mankind it be essential that we should appear in some form which they can see and comprehend . " " you have interest me deeply in all that you have tell me , " i say , grasp the hand which have hold out to me as a sign that our interview be at an end . " i shall often think of our short acquaintance . " " you will derive much benefit from it , " he say slowly , still hold my hand and look gravely and sadly into my eye . " you must remember that what will happen in the future be not necessarily bad because it do not fall in with your preconceive idea of right . be not hasty in your judgment . there be certain great rule which must be carry out , at whatever cost to individual . their operation may appear to you to be harsh and cruel , but that be as nothing compare with the dangerous precedent which would be establish by not enforce them . the ox and the sheep be safe from us , but the man with the blood of the high upon his hand should not and shall not live . " he throw up his arm at the last word with a fierce , threatening gesture , and , turn away from me , stride back to the ruin hut . i stand gaze after him until he disappear through the doorway , and then start off for home , revolve in my mind all that i have hear , and more particularly this last outburst of the occult philosopher . far on the right i could see the tall , white tower of stand out clear-cut and sharp against a dark cloud-bank which rise behind it . i think how any traveller who chance to pass that way would envy in his heart the tenant of that magnificent building , and how little they would guess the strange terror , the nameless danger , which be gather about his head . the black be but the image , i reflect , of the dark , more sombre storm which be about to burst . " whatever it all mean , and however it happen , " i ejaculate , " grant that the innocent be not confound with the guilty . " my father , when i reach home , be still in a ferment over his learn disputation with the stranger . " i trust , , " he say , " that i do not handle him too roughly . i should remember that i be in loco , and be less prone to argue with my guest . yet , when he take up this most untenable position , i could not refrain from attack him and hurl him out of it , which indeed i do , though you , who be ignorant of the nicety of the question , may have fail to perceive it . you observe , however , that my reference to 's edict be so conclusive that he at once rise and take his leave . " " you hold your own bravely , " i answer , " but what be your impression of the man now that you have see him ? " " why , " say my father , " he be one of those holy man who , under the various name of , , , , , and have devote their life to the study of the mystery of the buddhist faith . he be , i take it , a theosophist , or worshipper of the of knowledge , the high grade of which be the adept . this man and his companion have not attain this high position or they could not have cross the sea without contamination . it be probable that they be all advanced who hope in time to attain to the supreme honour of . " " but , father , " interrupt my sister , " this do not explain why man of such sanctity and attainment should choose to take up their quarter on the shore of a desolate scotch bay . " " ah , there you get beyond me , " my father answer . " i may suggest , however , that it be nobody 's business but their own , so long as they keep the peace and be amenable to the law of the land . " " have you ever hear , " i ask , " that these high priest of whom you speak have power which be unknown to us ? " " why , eastern literature be full of it . the be an eastern book , and be it not full of the record of such power from cover to cover ? it be unquestionable that they have in the past know many of 's secret which be lose to us . i can say , however , from my own knowledge that the modern theosophist really possess the power that they claim . " " be they a vindictive class of people ? " i ask . " be there any offence among them which can only be expiate by death ? " " not that i know of , " my father answer , raise his white eyebrow in surprise . " you appear to be in an inquisitive humour this be the object of all these question ? have our neighbour arouse your curiosity or suspicion in any way ? " i parry the question as good i might , for i be unwilling to let the old man know what be in my mind . no good purpose could come from his enlightenment ; his age and his health demand rest rather than anxiety ; and indeed , with the good will in the world i should have find it difficult to explain to another what be so very obscure to myself . for every reason i feel that it be well that he should be keep in the dark . never in all my experience have i know a day pass so slowly as do that eventful 5th of . in every possible manner i endeavour to while away the tedious hour , and yet it seem as if darkness would never arrive . i try to read , i try to write , i pace about the lawn , i walk to the end of the lane , i put new fly upon my , i begin to index my father 's a dozen way i endeavour to relieve the suspense which be become intolerable . my sister , i could see , be suffer from the same feverish restlessness . again and again our good father remonstrate with us in his mild way for our erratic behaviour and the continual interruption of his work which arise from it . at last , however , the tea be bring , and the tea be take , the curtain be draw , the lamp light , and after another interminable interval the prayer be read and the servant dismiss to their room . my father compound and swallow his nightly jorum of toddy , and then shuffle off to his room , leave the two of us in the parlour with our nerve in a tingle and our mind full of the most vague and yet terrible apprehension . it be a quarter past ten o'clock by the parlour timepiece when my father go off to his room , and leave and myself together . we hear his slow step die away up the creak staircase , until the distant slam of a door announce that he have reach his sanctum . the simple oil lamp upon the table throw a weird , uncertain light over the old room , flicker upon the carve oak panelling , and cast strange , fantastic shadow from the , straight-backed furniture . my sister be white , anxious face stand out in the obscurity with a startling exactness of profile like one of 's portrait . we sit opposite to each other on either side of the table with no sound break the silence save the measure ticking of the clock and the intermittent chirp of a cricket beneath the grate . there be something awe-inspiring in the absolute stillness . the whistling of a belated peasant upon the high road be a relief to us , and we strain our ear to catch the last of his note as he plod steadily homewards . at first we have make some of knitting and i of we soon abandon the useless deception , and sit uneasily wait , start and glance at each other with question eye whenever the faggot crackle in the fire or a rat scamper behind the wainscot . there be a heavy electrical feeling in the air , which weigh us down with a foreboding of disaster . i rise and fling the hall door open to admit the fresh breeze of the night . ragged cloud sweep across the sky , and the moon peep out at time between their hurry fringe , bath the whole countryside in its cold , white radiance . from where i stand in the doorway i could see the edge of the wood , though the house itself be only visible from the rise ground some little distance off . at my sister 's suggestion we walk together , she with her shawl over her head , as far as the summit of this elevation , and look out in the direction of the . there be no illumination of the window tonight . from roof to basement not a light twinkle in any part of the great building . its huge mass loom up dark and sullen amid the tree which surround it , look more like some giant sarcophagus than a human habitation . to our overwrought nerve there be something of terror in its mere bulk and its silence . we stand for some little time peer at it through the darkness , and then we make our way back to the parlour again , where we sit , we know not for what , and yet with absolute conviction that some terrible experience be in store for us . it be twelve o'clock or thereabout when my sister suddenly spring to her foot and hold up her finger to bespeak attention . " do you hear nothing ? " she ask . i strain my ear , but without success . " come to the door , " she cry , with a tremble voice . " now can you hear anything ? " in the deep silence of the night i distinctly hear a dull , murmur , clatter sound , continuous apparently , but very faint and low . " what be it ? " i ask , in a subdued voice . " it be the sound of a man run towards us , " she answer , and then , suddenly drop the last semblance of self-command , she fall upon her knee beside the table and begin pray aloud with that frenzied earnestness which intense , overpowering fear can produce , break off now and again into whimpering . i could distinguish the sound clearly enough now to know that her quick , feminine perception have not deceive her , and that it be indeed cause by a run man . on he come , and on down the high road , his footfall ring out clear and sharp every moment . an urgent messenger he must be , for he neither pause nor slacken his pace . the quick , crisp rattle be change suddenly to a dull , muffle murmur . he have reach the point where sand have be recently lay down for a hundred yard or so . in a few moment , however , he be back on hard ground again and his fly foot come near and ever near . he must , i reflect , be abreast of the head of the lane now . would he hold on ? or would he turn down to ? the thought have hardly cross my mind when i hear by the difference of the sound that the runner have turn the corner , and that his goal be beyond all question the laird 's house . rush down to the gate of the lawn , i reach it just as our visitor dash it open and fall into my arm . i could see in the moonlight that it be none other than . " what have happen ? " i cry . " what be amiss , ? " " my father ! " he father ! " his hat be go , his eye dilate with terror , and his face as bloodless as that of a corpse . i could feel that the hand which clasp my arm be quiver and shake with emotion . " you be exhaust , " i say , lead him into the parlour . " give yourself a moment 's rest before you speak to us . be calm , man , you be with your good friend . " i lay him on the old horsehair sofa , while , whose fear have all flow to the wind now that something practical be to be do , dash some brandy into a tumbler and bring it to him . the stimulant have a marvellous effect upon him , for the colour begin to come back into his pale cheek and the light of recognition in his eye . he sit up and take 's hand in both of his , like a man who be wake out of some bad dream and wish to assure himself that he be really in safety . " your father ? " i ask . " what of him ? " " he be go . " " go ! " " yes ; he be go ; and so be . we shall never set eye upon them again . " " but where have they go ? " i cry . " this be unworthy of you , . what right have we to sit here , allow our private feeling to overcome us , while there be a possibility of succour your father ? up , man ! let us follow him . tell me only what direction he take . " " it be no use , " young answer , bury his face in his hand . " do n't reproach me , , for you do n't know all the circumstance . what can we do to reverse the tremendous and unknown law which be act against us ? the blow have long be hang over us , and now it have fall . help us ! " " in 's name tell me what have happen ? " say i excitedly . " we must not yield to despair . " " we can do nothing until daybreak , " he answer . " we shall then endeavour to obtain some trace of them . it be hopeless at present . " " and how about and ? " i ask . " can we not bring them down from the at once ? your poor sister must be distract with terror . " " she know nothing of it , " answer . " she sleep at the other side of the house , and have not hear or see anything . as to my poor mother , she have expect some such event for so long a time that it have not come upon her as a surprise . she be , of course , overwhelm with grief , but would , i think , prefer to be leave to herself for the present . her firmness and composure should be a lesson to me , but i be constitutionally excitable , and this catastrophe come after our long period of suspense deprive me of my very reason for a time . " " if we can do nothing until the morning , " i say , " you have time to tell us all that have occur . " " i will do so , " he answer , rise and hold his shake hand to the fire . " you know already that we have have reason for some many year in fear that a terrible retribution be hang over my father 's head for a certain action of his early life . in this action he be associate with the man know as , so that the fact of the latter find his way to my father be a warning to us that the time have come , and that this 5th of anniversary of the be the day of its atonement . i tell you of our fear in my letter , and , if i be not mistake , my father also have some conversation with you , , upon the subject . when i see yesterday morning that he have hunt out the old uniform which he have always retain since he wear it in the afghan war , i be sure that the end be at hand , and that our foreboding would be realise . " he appear to be more compose in the afternoon than i have see him for year , and speak freely of his life in and of the incident of his youth . about nine o'clock he request us to go up to our own room , and lock us in precaution which he frequently take when the dark fit be upon him . it be always his endeavour , poor soul , to keep us clear of the curse which have fall upon his own unfortunate head . before part from us he tenderly embrace my mother and , and he afterwards follow me to my room , where he clasp my hand affectionately and give into my charge a small packet address to yourself . " " to me ? " i interrupt . " to you . i shall fulfill my commission when i have tell you my story . i conjure him to allow me to sit up with him and share any danger which might arise , but he implore me with irresistible earnestness not to add to his trouble by thwart his arrangement . see that i be really distress him by my pertinacity , i at last allow him to close the door and to turn the key upon the outside . i shall always reproach myself for my want of firmness . but what can you do when your own father refuse your assistance or co-operation ? you can force yourself upon him . " " i be sure that you do all you could do , " my sister say . " i mean to , dear , but , help me , it be hard to tell what be right . he leave me , and i hear his footstep die away down the long corridor . it be then about ten o'clock , or a little after . for a time i pace up and down the room , and then , carry the lamp to the head of my bed , i lie down without undress , read a , and pray from my heart that the night might pass safely over us . " i have at last fall into a troubled sleep when i be suddenly arouse by a loud , sonorous sound ringing in my ear . i sit up bewilder , but all be silent again . the lamp be burn low , and my watch show me that it be go on to midnight . i blunder to my foot , and be strike a match with the intention of light the candle , when the sharp , vehement cry break out again so loud and so clear that it might have be in the very room with me . my chamber be in the front of the house , while those of my mother and sister be at the back , so that i be the only one who command a view of the avenue . " rush to the window i draw the blind aside and look out . you know that the open up so as to form a broad stretch immediately in front of the house . just in the centre of this clear space there stand three man look up at the house . " the moon shine full upon them , glisten on their upturn eyeball , and by its light i could see that they be and black-haired , of a type that i be familiar with among the sikh and . two of them be thin , with eager , aesthetic countenance , while the third be kinglike and majestic , with a noble figure and flow beard . " " ! " i ejaculate . " what , you know of them ? " exclaim in great surprise . " you have meet them ? " " i know of them . they be buddhist priest , " i answer , " but go on . " " they stand in a line , " he continue , " sweep their arm upwards and downwards , while their lip move as if repeat some prayer or incantation . suddenly they cease to gesticulate , and break out for the third time into the wild , weird , piercing cry which have rouse me from my slumber . never shall i forget that shrill , dreadful summons swell and reverberate through the silent night with an intensity of sound which be still ring in my ear . " as it die slowly away , there be a rasp and creak as of key and bolt , follow by the clang of an opening door and the clatter of hurry foot . from my window i see my father and rush frantically out of the house hatless and unkempt , like man who be obey a sudden and overpowering impulse . the three stranger lay no hand on them , but all five sweep swiftly away down the avenue and vanish among the tree . i be positive that no force be use , or constraint of any visible kind , and yet i be as sure that my poor father and his companion be helpless prisoner as if i have see them drag away in manacle . " all this take little time in the acting . from the first summons which disturb my sleep to the last shadowy glimpse which i have of them between the tree trunk could hardly have occupy more than five minute of actual time . so sudden be it , and so strange , that when the drama be over and they be go i could have believe that it be all some terrible nightmare , some delusion , have i not feel that the impression be too real , too vivid , to be impute to fancy . " i throw my whole weight against my bedroom door in the hope of force the lock . it stand firm for a while , but i fling myself upon it again and again , until something snap and i find myself in the passage . " my first thought be for my mother . i rush to her room and turn the key in her door . the moment that i do so she step out into the corridor in her dressing-gown , and hold up a warning finger . " ' no noise , ' she say , be asleep . they have be call away ? ' " ' they have , ' i answer . " ' 's will be do ! ' she cry . ' your poor father will be happy in the next world than he have ever be in this . thank that be asleep . i give her chloral in her cocoa . ' " ' what be i to do ? ' i say distractedly . " ' where have they go ? how can i help him ? we can let him go from us like this , or leave these man to do what they will with him . shall i ride into and arouse the police ? ' " ' anything rather than that , ' my mother say earnestly . ' he have beg me again and again to avoid it . my son , we shall never set eye upon your father again . you may marvel at my dry eye , but if you know as i know the peace which death would bring him , you could not find it in your heart to mourn for him . all pursuit be , i feel , vain , and yet some pursuit there must be . let it be as private as possible . we can serve him good than by consult his wish . ' " ' but every minute be precious , ' i cry . ' even now he may be call upon us to rescue him from the clutch of those dark-skinned fiend . ' " the thought so madden me that i rush out of the house and down to the high road , but once there i have no indication in which direction to turn . the whole wide moor lie before me , without a sign of movement upon its broad expanse . i listen , but not a sound break the perfect stillness of the night . " it be then , my dear friend , as i stand , not know in which direction to turn , that the horror and responsibility break full upon me . i feel that i be combat against force of which i know nothing . all be strange and dark and terrible . " the thought of you , and of the help which i might look for from your advice and assistance , be a beacon of hope to me . at , at least , i should receive sympathy , and , above all , direction as to what i should do , for my mind be in such a whirl that i can trust my own judgment . my mother be content to be alone , my sister asleep , and no prospect of be able to do anything until daybreak . under those circumstance what more natural than that i should fly to you as fast as my foot would carry me ? you have a clear head , ; speak out , man , and tell me what i should do . , what should i do ? " he turn from one to the other of us with outstretch hand and eager , questioning eye . " you can do nothing while the darkness last , " i answer . " we must report the matter to the police , but we need not send our message to them until we be actually start upon the search , so as to comply with the law and yet have a private investigation , as your mother wish . , over the hill , have a lurcher dog which be as good as a bloodhound . if we set him on the general 's trail he will run him down if he have to follow him to o ' 's . " " it be terrible to wait calmly here while he may need our assistance . " " i fear our assistance could under any circumstance do him little good . there be force at work here which be beyond human intervention . besides , there be no alternative . we have , apparently , no possible clue as to the direction which they have take , and for us to wander aimlessly over the moor in the darkness would be to waste the strength which may be more profitably use in the morning . it will be daylight by five o'clock . in an hour or so we can walk over the hill together and get 's dog . " " another hour ! " groan , " every minute seem an age . " " lie down on the sofa and rest yourself , " say " you can serve your father well than by lay up all the strength you can , for we may have a weary trudge before us . but you mention a packet which the general have intend for me . " " it be here , " he answer , draw a small , flat parcel from his pocket and hand it over to me , " you will find , no doubt , that it will explain all which have be so mysterious . " the packet be seal at each end with black wax , bear the impress of the fly griffin , which i know to be the general 's crest . it be further secure by a band of broad tape , which i cut with my pocket-knife . across the outside be write in bold handwriting : " , , " and underneath : " to be hand to that gentleman in the event of the disappearance or decease of , , , late of the indian army . " so at last i be to know the dark secret which have cast a shadow over our life . here in my hand i hold the solution of it . with eager finger i break the seal and undo the wrapper . a note and a small bundle of discolour paper lie within . i draw the lamp over to me and open the former . it be date the preceding afternoon , and run in this way : my , -- - i should have satisfy your very natural curiosity on the subject which we have have occasion to talk of more than once , but i refrain for your own sake . i know by sad experience how unsettle and unnerve it be to be for ever wait for a catastrophe which you be convince must befall , and which you can neither avert nor accelerate . though it affect me specially , as be the person most concern , i be still conscious that the natural sympathy which i have observe in you , and your regard for 's father , would both combine to render you unhappy if you know the hopelessness and yet the vagueness of the fate which threaten me . i fear to disturb your mind , and i be therefore silent , though at some cost to myself , for my isolation have not be the least of the trouble which have weigh me down . many sign , however , and chief among them the presence of the buddhist upon the coast as describe by you this morning , have convince me that the weary waiting be at last over and that the hour of retribution be at hand . why i should have be allow to live nearly forty year after my offence be more than i can understand , but it be possible that those who have command over my fate know that such a life be the great of all penalty to me . never for an hour , night or day , have they suffer me to forget that they have mark me down as their victim . their accursed astral bell have be ring my knell for year , remind me ever that there be no spot upon earth where i can hope to be in safety . oh , the peace , the blessed peace of dissolution ! come what may on the other side of the tomb , i shall at least be quit of that thrice terrible sound . there be no need for me to enter into the wretched business again , or to detail at any length the event of 5th , @card@ , and the various circumstance which lead up to the death of , the arch adept . i have tear a sheaf of leave from my old journal , in which you will find a bald account of the matter , and an independent narrative be furnish by , of the , to the of some year which , however , the name be suppress . i have reason to believe that many people , even among those who know well , think that be romance , and that he have evolve his incident from his imagination . the few fade sheet which i send you will show you that this be not the case , and that our man of science must recognise power and law which can and have be use by man , but which be unknown to european civilisation . i do not wish to whine or to whimper , but i can help feel that i have have hard measure deal me in this world . i would not , know , take the life of any man , far less an age one , in cold blood . my temper and nature , however , be always fiery and headstrong , and in action when my blood be up , i have no knowledge of what i be about . neither the corporal nor i would have lay a finger upon have we not see that the tribesman be rally behind him . well , well , it be an old story now , and there be no profit in discuss it . may no other poor fellow ever have the same evil fortune ! i have write a short supplement to the statement contain in my journal for your information and that of any one else who may chance to be interested in the matter . and now , adieu ! be a good husband to , and , if your sister be brave enough to marry into such a family as ours , by all mean let her do so . i have leave enough to keep my poor wife in comfort . when she rejoin me i should wish it to be equally divide between the child . if you hear that i be go , do not pity , but congratulate your unfortunate friend , . i throw aside the letter and pick up the roll of blue foolscap which contain the solution of the mystery . it be all rag and fray at the inner edge , with trace of gum and thread still adhere to it , to show that it have be tear out of a strongly bind volume . the ink with which it have be write be fade somewhat , but across the head of the first page be inscribe in bold , clear character , evidently of late date than the rest : " of in the during the autumn of @card@ , " and then underneath : this extract contain some account of the event of the first week of of that year , include the skirmish of the ravine and the death of the man . i have the narrative lie before me now , and i copy it verbatim . if it contain some matter which have no direct bearing upon the question at issue , i can only say that i think it good to publish what be irrelevant than by cut and clip to lay the whole statement open to the charge of have be tamper with . , 1 , @card@ . -- and be pass through this morning on their way to the . have tiffin with the bengalese . late news from home that two attempt have be make on the 's life by name and . it promise to be a hard winter . the snow-line have descend a thousand foot upon the peak , but the pass will be open for week to come , and , even if they be block , we have establish so many depot in the country that and will have no difficulty in hold their own . they shall not meet with the fate of 's army . one such tragedy be enough for a century . of the , and i , be answerable for the safety of the communication for a distance of twenty mile or more , from the mouth of the valley to this side of the wooden bridge over the . , of the , be responsible on the other side , and of the , have a general supervision over both section . our force be not strong enough for the work which have to be do . i have a company and a half of our own regiment , and a squadron of , who be of no use at all among the rock . have three gun , but several of his man be down with cholera , and i doubt if he have enough to serve more than two . ( note : capsicum for it ) on the other hand , each convoy be usually provide with some guard of its own , though it be often absurdly inefficient . these valley and ravine which branch out of the main pass be alive with and pathan , who be keen robber as well as religious fanatic . i wonder they do n't swoop down on some of our caravan . they could plunder them and get back to their mountain fastness before we could interfere or overtake them . nothing but fear will restrain them . if i have my way i would hang one at the mouth of every ravine as a warning to the gang . they be personification of the devil to look at , , , with a mane of tangled hair , and most satanic sneer . no news today from the . 2 . -- must really ask for another company at the very least . i be convince that the communication would be cut off if any serious attack be make upon us . now , this morning two urgent message be send me from two different point more than sixteen mile apart , to say that there be sign of a descent of the tribe . , with one gun and the , go to the farther ravine , while i , with the infantry , hurry to the other , but we find it be a false alarm . i see no sign of the , and though we be greet by a splutter of bullet we be unable to capture any of the rascal . woe betide them if they fall into my hand . i would give them as short a shrift as ever a cateran get from a judge . these continued alarm may mean nothing or they may be an indication that the be assemble and have some plan in view . we have have no news from the for some time , but a convoy of wounded come through with the intelligence that have take . i hope he warm up any of the black rascal that fall into his hand . no word of . an elephant battery come up from the , look in very good condition . there be several convalescent with it go up to rejoin their regiment . know none of them except of the and young , who be my fag at , and whom i have never see since . punch and cigar fresco up to eleven o'clock . letter from & about their little bill forward on from . think a campaign free a man from these annoyance . say in his note that , since his written application have be in vain , he must call upon me in person . if he call upon me now he will assuredly be the bold and most persevere of tailor . a line from and another from to say that come in for all the money under the will . i be glad of it . 3 . -- news from the today . , of the cavalry , gallop through with dispatch . enter triumphantly on the 16th of last month , and , well still , have be rescue by , and bring safe into the british camp , together with the other hostage . ! this should end the whole wretched and the sack of the city . i hope wo n't be squeamish , or truckle to the hysterical party at home . the town should be lay in ash and the field sow with salt . above all , the and the must come down . so shall , , and many another gallant fellow know that his countryman could avenge if they could not save him ! it be hard when other be gain glory and experience to be stick in this miserable valley . i have be out of it completely , bar a few petty skirmish . however , we may see some service yet . a of ours bring in a today , who say that the tribe be mass in the ravine , ten mile to the north of us , and intend attack the next convoy . we ca n't rely on information of this sort , but there may prove to be some truth in it . propose to shoot our informant , so as to prevent his play the double traitor and report our proceeding . demur . if you be make war you should throw no chance away . i hate half-and-half measure . the child of seem to have be the only people who ever carry war to its logical in . make a compromise at last by which the man be to be detain as a prisoner and execute if his information prove to be false . i only hope we get a fair chance of show what we can do . no doubt these fellow at the will have ' and knighthood shower upon them thick and fast , while we poor devil , who have have most of the responsibility and anxiety , will be pass over completely . have a whitlow . the last convoy leave us a large packet of sauce , but as they forget to leave anything to eat with them , we have hand them over to the , who drink them out of their pannikin as if they be liqueur . we hear that another large convoy may be expect from the plain in the course of a day or two . take nine to four on for the . 4 . -- really mean business this time , i think . we have have two of our spy come in this morning with the same account about the gathering in the quarter . that old rascal be at the head of it , and i have recommend the government to present him with a telescope in return for his neutrality ! there will be no to present it to if i can but lay hand upon him . we expect the convoy tomorrow morning , and need anticipate no attack until it come up , for these fellow fight for plunder , not for glory , though , to do them justice , they have plenty of pluck when they get start . i have devise an excellent plan , and it have 's hearty support . by ! if we can only manage it , it will be as pretty a ruse as ever i hear of . our intention be to give out that we be go down the valley to meet the convoy and to block the mouth of a pass from which we profess to expect an attack . very good . we shall make a and reach their camp . once there i shall conceal my two hundred man in the waggon and travel up with the convoy again . our friend the enemy , have hear that we intend to go south , and see the caravan go north without us , will naturally swoop down upon it under the impression that we be twenty mile away . we shall teach them such a lesson that they would as soon think of stop a thunderbolt as of interfere again with one of her britannic 's provision train . i be all on thorn to be off . have rig up two of his gun so ingeniously that they look more like costermonger ' barrow than anything else . to see artillery ready for action in the convoy might arouse suspicion . the artilleryman will be in the waggon next the gun , all ready to unlimber and open fire . infantry in front and rear . have tell our confidential and discreet servant the plan which we do not intend to adopt . -- you wish a thing to be noise over a whole province always whisper it under a vow of secrecy to your confidential native servant . @card@ -- start for the convoy . may luck go with us ! 5 . -- o'clock in the evening . ! crown us with and myself ! who can compare with us as vermin killer ? i have only just get back , tired and weary , stain with blood and dust , but i have sit down before either wash or change to have the satisfaction of see our deed set forth in black and only in my private log for no eye but my own . i shall describe it all fully as a preparation for an official account , which must be draw up when get back . use to say that there be three degree of prevarication , a lie , and an official account . we at least can exaggerate our success , for it would be impossible to add anything to it . we set out , then , as per programme , and come upon the camp near the head of the valley . they have two weak company of the with them who might no doubt have hold their own with warning , but an unexpected rush of wild be a very difficult thing to stand against . with our reinforcement , however , and on our guard , we might defy the rascal . be in fine young fellow . we soon make him understand the situation , and be all ready for a start by daybreak though his waggon be so full that we be compel to leave several ton of fodder behind in order to make room for my sepoy and for the artillery . about five o'clock we inspan , to use an , and by six we be well on our way , with our escort as straggle and unconcerned as a caravan as ever invite attack . i could soon see that it be to be no false alarm this time , and that the tribe really mean business . from my post of observation , under the canvas screen of one of the waggon , i could make out turbaned head pop up to have a look at us from among the rock , and an occasional scout hurry northward with the news of our approach . it be not , however , until we come abreast of the , a gloomy defile bound by gigantic cliff , that the begin to show in force , though they have ambush themselves so cleverly that , have we not be keenly on the look-out for them , we might have walk right into the trap . as it be , the convoy halt , upon which the , see that they be observe , open a heavy but fire upon us . i have ask to throw out his man in skirmish order , and to give them direction to retreat slowly upon the waggon so as to draw the on . the ruse succeed to perfection . as the redcoat steadily retire , keep behind cover as much as possible , the enemy follow them up with yell of exultation , spring from rock to rock , wave their in the air , and howl like a pack of demon . with their black , contorted , mock face , their fierce gesture , and their flutter garment , they would have make a study for any painter who wish to portray 's conception of the army of the damned . from every side they press in until , see , as they think , nothing between them and victory , they leave the shelter of the rock and come rush down , a furious , howl throng , with the green banner of the in their van . now be our chance , and gloriously we utilise it . from every cranny and slit of the waggon come a blaze of fire , every shot of which tell among the mob . two or three score roll over like rabbit and the rest reel for a moment , and then , with their chief at their head , come on again in a magnificent rush . it be useless , however , for undisciplined man to attempt to face such a fire . the leader be bowl over , and the other , after hesitate for a few moment , turn and make for the rock . it be our turn now to assume the offensive . the gun be unlimber and grape pour into them , while our little infantry force advance at the double , shoot and stab all whom they overtake . have i know the tide of battle turn so rapidly and so decisively . the sullen retreat become a flight , and the flight a panic-stricken rout , until there be nothing leave of the tribesman except a scattered , demoralise rabble fly wildly to their native fastness for shelter and protection . i be by no mean incline to let them off cheaply now that i have them in my power . on the contrary , i determine to teach them such a lesson that the sight of a single scarlet uniform would in future be a passport in itself . we follow hard upon the track of the fugitive and enter the defile at their very heel . have detach and with a company on either side to protect my wing , i push on with my sepoy and a handful of artilleryman , give the enemy no time to rally or to recover themselves . we be so handicap , however , by our stiff european uniform and by our want of practice in climb , that we should have be unable to overtake any of the mountaineer have it not be for a fortunate accident . there be a small ravine which open into the main pass , and in their hurry and confusion some of the fugitive rush down this . i see sixty or seventy of them turn down , but i should have pass them by and continue in pursuit of the main body have not one of my scout come rustle up to inform me that the small ravine be a cul-de-sac , and that the who have go up it have no possible means of get out again except by cut their way through our rank . here be an opportunity of striking terror into the tribe . leave and to continue the pursuit of the main body , i wheel my sepoy into the narrow path and proceed slowly down it in extended order , cover the whole ground from cliff to cliff . not a jackal could have pass us unseen . the rebel be catch like rat in a trap . the defile in which we find ourselves be the most gloomy and majestic that i have ever see . on either side naked precipice rise sheer up for a thousand foot or more , converge upon each other so as to leave a very narrow slit of daylight above us , which be further reduce by the feathery fringe of palm tree and aloe which hang over each lip of the chasm . the cliff be not more than a couple of hundred yard apart at the entrance , but as we advance they grow near and near , until a half company in close order could hardly march abreast . a sort of twilight reign in this strange valley , and the dim , uncertain light make the great , basalt rock loom up vague and fantastic . there be no path , and the ground be most uneven , but i push on briskly , caution my fellow to have their finger on their trigger , for i could see that we be near the point where the two cliff would form an acute angle with each other . at last we come in sight of the place . a great pile of boulder be heap up at the very end of the pass , and among these our fugitive be skulk , entirely demoralise apparently , and incapable of resistance . they be useless as prisoner , and it be out of the question to let them go , so there be no choice but to polish them off . wave my sword , i be lead my man on , when we have a most dramatic interruption of a sort which i have see once or twice on the board of , but never in real life . in the side of the cliff , close to the pile of stone where the be make their last stand , there be a cave which look more like the lair of some wild beast than a human habitation . out of this dark archway there suddenly emerge an old a very , very old man that all the other veteran whom i have see be as chicken compare with him . his hair and beard be both as white as snow , and each reach more than half-way to his waist . his face be wrinkle and brown and ebony , a cross between a monkey and a mummy , and so thin and emaciate be his shrivel limb that you would hardly have give him credit for have any vitality leave , be it not for his eye , which glitter and sparkle with excitement , like two diamond in a setting of mahogany . this apparition come rush out of the cave , and , throw himself between the fugitive and our fellow , motion us back with as imperious a sweep of the hand as ever an emperor use to his slave . " man of blood , " he cry , in a voice of thunder , speak excellent , be a place for prayer and meditation , not for murder . desist , lest the wrath of the god fall upon you . " " stand aside , old man , " i shout . " you will meet with a hurt if you do n't get out of the way . " i could see that the be take heart , and that some of my sepoy be flinch , as if they do not relish this new enemy . clearly , i must act promptly if i wish to complete our success . i dash forward at the head of the white artilleryman who have stick to me . the old fellow rush at us with his arm out as if to stop us , but it be not time to stick at trifle , so i pass my sword through his body at the same moment that one of the gunner bring his carbine down upon his head . he drop instantly , and the , at the sight of his fall , set up the most unearthly howl of horror and consternation . the , who have be incline to hang back , come on again the moment he be dispose of , and it do not take us long to consummate our victory . hardly a man of the enemy get out of the defile alive . what could or have do more ? our own loss in the whole affair have be kill and about fifteen wounded . get their banner , a green wisp of a thing with a sentence of the koran engrave upon it . i look , after the action , for the old chap , but his body have disappear , though how or whither i have no conception . his blood be upon his own head ! he would be alive now if he have not interfere , as the constable say at home , " with an officer in the execution of his duty . " the scout tell me that his name be , and that he be one of the high and holy of the buddhist . he have great fame in the district as a prophet and worker of the hubbub when he be cut down . they tell me that he be live in this very cave when pass this way in @card@ , with a lot more bosh of that sort . i go into the cave , and how any man could live in it a week be a mystery to me , for it be little more than four foot high , and as damp and dismal a grotto as ever be see . a wooden settle and a rough table be the sole furniture , with a lot of parchment scroll with hieroglyphic . well , he have go where he will learn that the gospel of peace and good will be superior to all his lore . peace go with him . and never catch the main know they the honour of the day rest with me . i ought to get a step for it , anyhow , and perhaps , who know ? some mention in the . what a lucky chance ! i think deserve his telescope after all for give it to me . shall have something to eat now , for i be half starve . glory be an excellent thing , but you can live upon it . 6 , @card@ -- me try to set down as calmly and as accurately as i can all that occur last night . i have never be a dreamer or a visionary , so i can rely upon my own sense , though i be bind to say that if any other fellow have tell me the same thing i should have doubt him . i might even have suspect that i be deceive at the time have i not hear the bell since . however , i must narrate what happen . be in my tent with me have a quiet cheroot until about ten o'clock . i then walk the round with my , and have see that all be right i turn in a little before eleven . i be just drop off to sleep , for i be dog-tired after the day 's work , when i be arouse by some slight noise , and , look round , i see a man dress in asiatic costume standing at the entrance of my tent . he be motionless when i see him , and he have his eye fix upon me with a solemn and stern expression . my first thought be that the fellow be some or afghan fanatic who have steal in with the intention of stab me , and with this idea in my mind i have all the will to spring from my couch and defend myself , but the power be unaccountably lack . an overpowering languor and want of energy possess me . have i see the dagger descend upon my breast i could not have make an effort to avert it . i suppose a bird when it be under the influence of a snake feel very much as i do in the presence of this stranger . my mind be clear enough , but my body be as torpid as though i be still asleep . i shut my eye once or twice and try to persuade myself that the whole thing be a delusion , but every time that i open them there be the man still regard me with the same stony , menace stare . the silence become unendurable . i feel that i must overcome my languor so far as to address him . i be not a nervous man , and i never know before what mean when he write " . " at last i manage to stammer out a few word , ask the intruder who he be and what he want . " lieutenant , " he answer , speak slowly and gravely , " you have commit this day the foul sacrilege and the great crime which it be possible for man to do . you have slay one of the thrice bless and reverend one , an arch adept of the first degree , an elder brother who have tread the high path for more year than you have number month . you have cut him off at a time when his labour promise to reach a climax and when he be about to attain a height of occult knowledge which would have bring man one step near to his creator . all this you have do without excuse , without provocation , at a time when he be plead the cause of the helpless and distressed . listen now to me , . " when first the occult science be pursue many thousand of year ago , it be find by the learn that the short tenure of human existence be too limit to allow a man to attain the lofty height of inner life . the inquirer of those day direct their energy in the first place , therefore , to the lengthen of their own day in order that they might have more scope for improvement . " by their knowledge of the secret law of they be enable to fortify their body against disease and old age . it only remain to protect themselves against the assault of wicked and violent man who be ever ready to destroy what be wise and noble than themselves . there be no direct means by which this protection could be effect , but it be in some measure attain by arrange the occult force in such a way that a terrible and unavoidable retribution should await the offender . " it be irrevocably ordain by law which can be reverse that any one who should shed the blood of a brother who have attain a certain degree of sanctity should be a doomed man . those law be extant to this day , , and you have place yourself in their power . king or emperor would be helpless before the force which you have call into play . what hope , then , be there for you ? " in former day these law act so instantaneously that the slayer perish with his victim . it be judge afterwards that this prompt retribution prevent the offender from have time to realise the enormity of his offence . " it be therefore ordain that in all such case the retribution should be leave in the hand of the , or immediate disciple of the holy man , with power to extend or shorten it at their will , exact it either at the time or at any future anniversary of the day when the crime be commit . " why punishment should come on those day only it do not concern you to know . suffice it that you be the murderer of , the thrice bless , and that i be the senior of his three commission to avenge his death . " it be no personal matter between us . amid our study we have no leisure or inclination for personal matter . it be an immutable law , and it be as impossible for us to relax it as it be for you to escape from it . sooner or later we shall come to you and claim your life in atonement for the one which you have take . " the same fate shall be mete out to the wretched soldier , , who , though less guilty than yourself , have incur the same penalty by raise his sacrilegious hand against the choose of . if your life be prolonged , it be merely that you may have time to repent of your misdeed and to feel the full force of your punishment . " and lest you should be tempt to cast it out of your mind and to forget it , our astral bell , the use of which be one of our occult ever remind you of what have be and what be to be . you shall hear it by day and you shall hear it by night , and it will be a sign to you that do what you may and go where you will , you can never shake yourself clear of the of . " you will never see me more , accursed one , until the day when we come for you . live in fear , and in that anticipation which be bad than death . " with a menace wave of the hand the figure turn and sweep out of my tent into the darkness . the instant that the fellow disappear from my sight i recover from my lethargy which have fall upon me . spring to my foot , i rush to the opening and look out . a sentry be stand lean upon his musket , a few pace off . " you dog , " i say in hindustani . " what do you mean by let people disturb me in this way ? " the man stare at me in amazement . " have any one disturb the sahib ? " he ask . " this moment . you must have see him pass out of my tent . " " surely the be mistake , " the man answer , respectfully but firmly . " i have be here for an hour , and no one have pass from the tent . " puzzle and disconcert , i be sit by the side of my couch wonder whether the whole thing be a delusion , bring on by the nervous excitement of our skirmish , when a new marvel overtake me . from over my head there suddenly sound a sharp , tinkling sound , like that produce by an empty glass when flip by the nail , only louder and more intense . i look up , but nothing be to be see . i examine the whole interior of the tent carefully , but without discover any cause for the strange sound . at last , wear out with fatigue , i give the mystery up , and throw myself on the couch be soon fast asleep . when i awake this morning i be incline to put the whole of my 's experience down to imagination , but i be soon disabuse of the idea , for i have hardly rise before the same strange sound be repeat in my very ear as loudly , and to all appearance as , as before . what it be or where it come from i can conceive . i have not hear it since . can the fellow 's threat have something in them and this be the warning bell of which he speak ? surely it be impossible . yet his manner be indescribably impressive . i have try to set down what he say as accurately as i can , but i fear i have omit a good deal . what be to be the end of this strange affair ? i must go in for a course of religion and holy water . not a word to or . they tell me i be look like a ghost this morning . evening . -- manage to compare note with of the , who knock the old fellow over with the butt of his gun . his experience have be the same as mine . he have hear the sound , too . what be the meaning of it all ? my brain be in a whirl . @card@ ( four day later ) . -- help us ! this last laconic entry terminate the journal . it seem to me that , come as it do after four day ' complete silence , it tell a clear tale of shaken nerve and a break spirit than could any more elaborate narrative . pin on to the journal be a supplementary statement which have evidently be recently add by the general . " from that day to this , " it say , " i have have no night or day free from the intrusion of that dreadful sound with its accompanying train of thought . time and custom have bring me no relief , but on the contrary , as the year pass over my head my physical strength decrease and my nerve become less able to bear up against the continual strain . " i be a break man in mind and body . i live in a state of tension , always strain my ear for the hate sound , afraid to converse with my fellow for fear of expose my dreadful condition to them , with no comfort or hope of comfort on this side of the grave . i should be willing , know , to die , and yet as each 5th of come round , i be prostrate with fear because i do not know what strange and terrible experience may be in store for me . " forty year have pass since i slay , and forty time i have go through all the horror of death , without attain the blessed peace which lie beyond . " i have no means of know in what shape my fate will come upon me . i have immure myself in this lonely country , and surround myself with barrier , because in my weak moment my instinct urge me to take some step for self-protection , but i know well in my heart how futile it all be . they must come quickly now , for i grow old , and will forestall them unless they make haste . " i take credit to myself that i have keep my hand off the or opium bottle . it have always be in my power to checkmate my occult persecutor in that way , but i have ever hold that a man in this world can desert his post until he have be relieve in due course by the authority . i have have no scruple , however , about expose myself to danger , and , during the sikh and sepoy war , i do all that a man could do to court death . he pass me by , however , and pick out many a young fellow to whom life be only opening and who have everything to live for , while i survive to win crosse and honour which have lose all relish for me . " well , well , these thing can depend upon chance , and there be no doubt some deep reason for it all . " one compensation have make me in the shape of a true and faithful wife , to whom i tell my dreadful secret before the wedding , and who nobly consent to share my lot . she have lift half the burden from my shoulder , but with the effect , poor soul , of crush her own life beneath its weight ! " my child , too , have be a comfort to me . know all , or nearly all . we have endeavour to keep in the dark , though we can prevent her from know that there be something amiss . " i should like this statement to be show to of . he hear on one occasion this haunting sound . my sad experience may show him that i speak truth when i say that there be much knowledge in the world which have never find its way to . " . " it be go on for dawn by the time that i have finish this extraordinary narrative , to which my sister and listen with the most absorbed attention . already we could see through the window that the star have begin to fade and a grey light to appear in the east . the crofter who own the lurcher dog live a couple of mile off , so it be time for us to be on foot . leave to tell my father the story in such fashion as she might , we thrust some food in our pocket and set off upon our solemn and eventful errand . it be dark enough when we start to make it no easy matter to find our way across the moor , but as we advance it grow light and light , until by the time we reach 's cabin it be broad daylight . early as it be , he be up and about , for the peasant be an early rise race . we explain our mission to him in as few word as possible , and have make his scot ever neglect that preliminary ? -- agree not only to let us have the use of his dog but to come with us himself . , in his desire for privacy , would have demur at this arrangement , but i point out to him that we have no idea what be in store for us , and the addition of a strong , able-bodied man to our party might prove to be of the utmost consequence . again , the dog be less likely to give us trouble if we have its master to control it . my argument carry the day , and the biped accompany us as well as his four-footed companion . there be some little similarity between the two , for the man be a fellow with a great mop of yellow hair and a straggle beard , while the dog be of the long-haired , unkempt breed look like an animated bundle of oakum . all our way to the its owner keep retailing instance of the creature 's sagacity and power of scent , which , accord to his account , be little less than miraculous . his anecdote have a poor audience , i fear , for my mind be fill with the strange story which i have be read , while stride on with wild eye and feverish cheek , without a thought for anything but the problem which we have to solve . again and again as we top an eminence i see him look eagerly round him in the faint hope of see some trace of the absentee , but over the whole expanse of moorland there be no sign of movement or of life . all be dead and silent and desert . our visit to the be a very brief one , for every minute now be of importance . rush in and emerge with an old coat of his father 's , which he hand to , who hold it out to the dog . the intelligent brute sniff at it all over , then run whine a little way down the avenue , come back to sniff the coat again , and finally elevate its stump of a tail in triumph , utter a succession of sharp yelp to show that it be satisfy that it have strike the trail . its owner tie a long cord to its collar to prevent it from go too fast for us , and we all set off upon our search , the dog tug and strain at its leash in its excitement as it follow in the general 's footstep . our way lie for a couple of hundred yard along the high road , and then pass through a gap in the hedge and on to the moor , across which we be lead in a to the northward . the sun have by this time rise above the horizon , and the whole countryside look so fresh and sweet , from the blue , sparkling sea to the purple mountain , that it be difficult to realise how weird and uncanny be the enterprise upon which we be engage . the scent must have lie strongly upon the ground , for the dog never hesitate nor stop , drag its master along at a pace which render conversation impossible . at one place , in cross a small stream , we seem to get off the trail for a few minute , but our ally soon pick it up on the other side and follow it over the trackless moor , whine and yelp all the time in its eagerness . have we not all three be fleet of foot and long of wind , we could not have persist in the continuous , rapid journey over the rough of ground , with the heather often well-nigh up to our waist . for my own part , i have no idea now , look back , what goal it be which i expect to reach at the end of our pursuit . i can remember that my mind be full of the vague and most vary speculation . could it be that the three buddhist have have a craft in readiness off the coast , and have embark with their prisoner for the ? the direction of their track seem at first to favour this supposition , for it lie in the line of the upper end of the bay , but it end by branch off and strike directly inland . clearly the ocean be not to be our terminus . by ten o'clock we have walk close upon twelve mile , and be compel to call a halt for a few minute to recover our breath , for the last mile or two we have be breast the long , weary slope of the hill . from the summit of this range , which be nowhere more than a thousand foot in height , we could see , look northward , such a scene of bleakness and desolation as can hardly be match in any country . right away to the horizon stretch the broad expanse of mud and of water , mingle and mix together in the wild chaos , like a portion of some world in the process of formation . here and there on the surface of this great marsh there have burst out patch of sickly yellow reed and of livid , greenish scum , which only serve to heighten and intensify the gloomy effect of the dull , melancholy expanse . on the side nearest to us some abandon show that ubiquitous man have be at work there , but beyond these few petty scar there be no sign anywhere of human life . not even a crow nor a seagull flap its way over that hideous desert . this be the great of . it be a salt-water marsh form by an inroad of the sea , and so intersect be it with dangerous swamp and treacherous pitfall of liquid mud , that no man would venture through it unless he have the guidance of one of the few peasant who retain the secret of its path . as we approach the fringe of rush which mark its border , a foul , dank smell rise up from the stagnant wilderness , as from impure water and decay earthy , noisome smell which poison the fresh upland air . so forbidding and gloomy be the aspect of the place that our stout crofter hesitate , and it be all that we could do to persuade him to proceed . our lurcher , however , not be subject to the delicate impression of our high organisation , still run yelp along with its nose on the ground and every fibre of its body quiver with excitement and eagerness . there be no difficulty about pick our way through the morass , for wherever the five could go we three could follow . if we could have have any doubt as to our dog 's guidance they would all have be remove now , for in the soft , black , ooze soil we could distinctly trace the track of the whole party . from these we could see that they have walk abreast , and , furthermore , that each be about equidistant from the other . clearly , then , no physical force have be use in take the general and his companion along . the compulsion have be psychical and not material . once within the swamp , we have to be careful not to deviate from the narrow track , which offer a firm foothold . on each side lie shallow sheet of stagnant water overlie a treacherous bottom of mud , which rise above the surface here and there in moist , sweltering bank , mottle over with occasional patch of unhealthy vegetation . great purple and yellow fungus have break out in a dense eruption , as though be afflict with a foul disease , which manifest itself by this crop of plague spot . here and there dark , creature scuttle across our path , and hideous , worm wriggle and writhe amid the sickly reed . swarm of buzz , pipe insect rise up at every step and form a dense cloud around our head , settle on our hand and face and inoculate us with their filthy venom . have i venture into so pestilent and forbid a place . stride on , however , with a set purpose upon his swarthy brow , and we could but follow him , determine to stand by him to the end of the adventure . as we advance , the path grow narrow and narrow until , as we see by the track , our predecessor have be compel to walk in single file . be lead us with the dog , behind him , while i bring up the rear . the peasant have be sulky and surly for a little time back , hardly answer when speak to , but he now stop short and positively refuse to go a step farther . " it be no ' canny , " he say , " besides i ken where it will lead us . " " where , then ? " i ask . " the o ' , " he answer . " it be no far frae here , i be think . " " the of ! what be that , then ? " " it be a great , muckle hole in the ground that gang ' so deep that could ever reach the bottom . indeed there be folk say that it be just a door leadin ' the bottomless pit ' . " " you have be there , then ? " i ask . " be there ! " he cry . " what would i be ' at the o ' ? no , i have never be there , nor any other man in his sense . " " how do you know about it , then ? " " my have be there , and that be how i ken , " answer . " he be ' one and he go for a bet . he like talk it afterwards , and he tell a ' what befall him , but he be aye fear o ' the very name . he be the first that have be at the o ' , and he will be the last for me . if will ' my advice will just gie the matter up and gang hame again , for there be na be get o ' this place . " " we shall go on with you or without you , " answer . " let us have your dog and we can pick you up on our way back . " " , na , " he cry , " i will no ' my dog ' bogle , and run down as if he be a hare . the dog shall bide ' me . " " the dog shall go with us , " say my companion , with his eye blaze . " we have no time to argue with you . here be a five-pound note . let us have the dog , or , by , i shall take it by force and throw you in the bog if you hinder us . " i could realise the of forty year ago when i see the fierce and sudden wrath which light up the feature of his son . either the bribe or the threat have the desire effect , for the fellow grab at the money with one hand while with the other he surrender the leash which hold the lurcher . leave him to retrace his step , we continue to make our way into the utmost recess of the great swamp . the tortuous path grow less and less define as we proceed , and be even cover in place with water , but the increase excitement of the hound and the sight of the deep footmark in the mud stimulate us to push on . at last , after struggle through a grove of high bulrush , we come on a spot the gloomy horror of which might have furnish with a fresh terror for his " . " the whole bog in this part appear to have sink in , form a great , depression , which terminate in the centre in a circular rift or opening about forty foot in diameter . it be a perfect maelstrom of mud , slope down on every side to this silent and awful chasm . clearly this be the spot which , under the name of the of , bear such a sinister reputation among the rustic . i could not wonder at its impress their imagination , for a more weird or gloomy scene , or one more worthy of the avenue which lead to it , could not be conceive . the step pass down the declivity which surround the abyss , and we follow them with a sink feeling in our heart , as we realise that this be the end of our search . a little way from the downward path be the return trail make by the foot of those who have come back from the chasm 's edge . our eye fall upon these track at the same moment , and we each give a cry of horror , and stand gaze speechlessly at them . for there , in those blur footmark , the whole drama be reveal . five have go down , but only three have return none shall ever know the detail of that strange tragedy . there be no mark of struggle nor sign of attempt at escape . we kneel at the edge of the and endeavour to pierce the unfathomable gloom which shroud it . a faint , sickly exhalation seem to rise from its depth , and there be a distant hurry , clatter sound as of water in the bowel of the earth . a great stone lie embed in the mud , and this i hurl over , but we never hear thud or splash to show that it have reach the bottom . as we hang over the noisome chasm a sound do at last rise to our ear out of its murky depth . high , clear , and throb , it tinkle for an instant out of the abyss , to be succeed by the same deadly stillness which have precede it . i do not wish to appear superstitious , or to put down to extraordinary cause that which may have a natural explanation . that one keen note may have be some strange water sound produce far down in the bowel of the earth . it may have be that or it may have be that sinister bell of which i have hear so much . be this as it may , it be the only sign that rise to us from the last terrible of the two who have pay the debt which have so long be owe . we join our voice in a call with the unreasoning obstinacy with which man will cling to hope , but no answer come back to us save a hollow moan from the depth beneath . footsore and , we retrace our step and climb the slimy slope once more . " what shall we do , ? " i ask , in a subdued voice . " we can but pray that their soul may rest in peace . " look at me with flash eye . " this may be all accord to occult law , " he cry , " but we shall see what the law of have to say upon it . i suppose a chela may be hang as well as any other man . it may not be too late yet to run them down . here , good dog , good ! " he pull the hound over and set it on the track of the three man . the creature sniff at it once or twice , and then , fall upon its stomach , with bristle hair and protrude tongue , it lie shiver and tremble , a very embodiment of canine terror . " you see , " i say , " it be no use contend against those who have power at their command to which we can even give a name . there be nothing for it but to accept the inevitable , and to hope that these poor man may meet with some compensation in another world for all that they have suffer in this . " " and be free from all devilish religion and their murderous worshipper ! " cry furiously . compel me to acknowledge in my own heart that the murderous spirit have be set on foot by the christian before it be take up by the buddhist , but i forbear to remark upon it , for fear of irritate my companion . for a long time i could not draw him away from the scene of his father 's death , but at last , by repeat argument and reasoning , i succeed in make him realise how useless and unprofitable any further effort on our part must necessarily prove , and in induce him to return with me to . oh , the wearisome , tedious journey ! it have seem long enough when we have some slight flicker of hope , or at least of expectation , before us , but now that our bad fear be fulfill it appear interminable . we pick up our peasant guide at the outskirt of the marsh , and have restore his dog we let him find his own way home , without tell him anything of the result of our expedition . we ourselves plod all day over the moor with heavy foot and heavy heart until we see the ill-omened tower of , and at last , as the sun be set , find ourselves once more beneath its roof . there be no need for me to enter into further detail , nor to describe the grief which our tidings convey to mother and to daughter . their long expectation of some calamity be not sufficient to prepare them for the terrible reality . for week my poor hover between life and death , and though she come round at last , thank to the nursing of my sister and the professional skill of , she have never to this day entirely recover her former vigour . , too , suffer much for some time , and it be only after our removal to that he rally from the shock which he have undergo . as to poor , neither medical attention nor change of air can ever have a permanent effect upon her . slowly and surely , but very placidly , she have decline in health and strength , until it be evident that in a very few week at the most she will have rejoin her husband and restore to him the one thing which he must have grudge to leave behind . the of come home from restore in health , with the result that we be compel to return once more to . the change be agreeable to us , for recent event have cast a cloud over our country life and have surround us with unpleasant association . besides , a highly honourable and remunerative appointment in connection with the library have become vacant , and have , through the kindness of the late , be offer to my father , who , as may be imagine , lose no time in accept so congenial a post . in this way we come back to very much more important people than we leave it , and with no further reason to be uneasy about the detail of housekeeping . but , in truth , the whole household have be dissolve , for i have be marry for some month to my dear , and be to become upon the 23rd of the month . if she make him as good a wife as his sister have make me , we may both set ourselves down as fortunate man . these mere domestic episode be , as i have already explain , introduce only because i can avoid allude to them . my object in draw up this statement and publish the evidence which corroborate it , be certainly not to parade my private affair before the public , but to leave on record an authentic narrative of a most remarkable series of event . this i have endeavour to do in as methodical a manner as possible , exaggerate nothing and suppress nothing . the reader have now the evidence before him , and can form his own opinion unaided by me as to the cause of the disappearance and death of and of , , there be only one point which be still dark to me . why the of should have remove their victim to the desolate of instead of take their life at , be , i confess , a mystery to me . in deal with occult law , however , we must allow for our own complete ignorance of the subject . do we know more we might see that there be some analogy between that foul bog and the sacrilege which have be commit , and that their ritual and custom demand that just such a death be the one appropriate to the crime . on this point i should be sorry to be dogmatic , but at least we must allow that the buddhist priest must have have some very good cause for the course of action which they so deliberately carry out . month afterwards i see a short paragraph in the of announce that three eminent , , and just return in the steamship from a short trip to . the very next item be devote to an account of the life and service of , " who have lately disappear from his country house in , and who , there be too much reason to fear , have be drown . " i wonder if by chance there be any other human eye but mine which trace a connection between these paragraph . i never show them to my wife or to , and they will only know of their existence when they read these page . i do n't know that there be any other point which need clear up . the intelligent reader will have already see the reason for the general 's fear of dark face , of wandering man ( not know how his pursuer might come after him ) , and of visitor ( from the same cause and because his hateful bell be liable to sound at all time ) . his break sleep lead him to wander about the house at night , and the lamp which he burn in every room be no doubt to prevent his imagination from people the darkness with terror . lastly , his elaborate precaution be , as he have himself explain , rather the result of a feverish desire to do something than in the expectation that he could really ward off his fate . will tell you that there be no such power as those claim by the eastern mystic . i , , can confidently answer that science be wrong . for what be science ? be the consensus of opinion of scientific man , and history have show that it be slow to accept a truth . sneer at for twenty year . prove mathematically that an iron ship could not swim , and science declare that a steamship could not cross the . like 's , our wise professor 's forte be " stet . " be , to use his own jargon , his prototype . let him learn that if he will but cease to believe in the infallibility of his own method , and will look to the , from which all great movement come , he will find there a school of philosopher and of savant who , work on different line from his own , be many thousand year ahead of him in all the essential of knowledge .