" i be afraid that he wo n't come , " say , in a disconsolate voice . " why not ? " " oh , look at the weather ; it be something too awful . " as she speak a whirl of snow beat with a muffle patter against the cosy window , while a long blast of wind shriek and whistle through the branch of the great elm which skirt the garden . rise from the sketch upon which he have be work , and take one of the lamp in his hand peer out into the darkness . the long skeleton limb of the bare tree toss and quiver dimly amid the whirl drift . his sister sit by the fire , her in her lap , and look up at her brother profile which show against the brilliant yellow light . it be a handsome face , young and fair and clear cut , with wavy brown hair comb backwards and ripple down into that outward curve at the end which one associate with the artistic temperament . there be refinement too in his slightly pucker eye , his dainty pince-nez glass , and in the black velveteen coat which catch the light so richly upon its shoulder . in his mouth only there be suspicion of coarseness , a possibility of in the eye of some , and of his sister among them , mar the grace and beauty of his feature . yet , as he be wont himself to say , when one think that each poor mortal be heir to a legacy of every evil trait or bodily taint of so vast a line of ancestor , lucky indeed be the man who do not find that have score up some family debt upon his feature . and indeed in this case the remorseless creditor have go so far as to exact a claim from the lady also , though in her case the extreme beauty of the upper part of the face draw the eye away from any weakness which might be find in the low . she be dark than her dark that her heavily coil hair seem to be black until the light shine slantwise across it . the delicate , feature , the finely trace brow , and the thoughtful , humorous eye be all perfect in their way , and yet the combination leave something to be desire . there be a vague sense of a flaw somewhere , in feature or in expression , which resolve itself , when analyse , into a slight and droop of the low lip ; small indeed , and yet pronounce enough to turn what would have be a beautiful face into a merely pretty one . very despondent and somewhat cross she look as she lean back in the armchair , the tangle of silk and of drab holland upon her lap , her hand clasp behind her head , with her snowy forearm and little pink elbow project on either side . " i know he wo n't come , " she repeat . " nonsense , ! of course he will come . a sailor and afraid of the weather ! " " ! " she raise her finger , and a smile of triumph play over her face , only to die away again into a blank look of disappointment . " it be only papa , " she murmur . a shuffling step be hear in the hall , and a little peaky man , with his slipper very much down at the heel , come shamble into the room . , sen . , be pale and , with a thin straggle red beard shot with grey , and a sunken downcast face . and ill-health have both leave their mark upon him . ten year before he have be one of the large and rich in , but a long run of commercial bad luck have sap his great fortune , and have finally drive him into the . the death of his wife on the very day of his insolvency have fill his cup of sorrow , and he have go about since with a stunned , expression upon his weak pallid face which speak of a mind unhinge . so complete have be his downfall that the family would have be reduce to absolute poverty be it not for a small legacy of a year which both the child have receive from one of their uncle upon the mother 's side who have amass a fortune in . by combine their income , and by take a house in the quiet country district of , some fourteen mile from the great city , they be still able to live with some approach to comfort . the change , however , be a bitter one to , who have to forego the luxury dear to his artistic temperament , and to think of turn what have be merely an overrule hobby into a means of earn a living ; and even more to , who wince before the pity of her old friend , and find the lane and field of intolerably dull after the life and bustle of . their discomfort be aggravate by the conduct of their father , whose life now be one long wail over his misfortune , and who alternately seek comfort in the and in the decanter for the ill which have befall him . to , however , present one attraction , which be now about to be take from her . their choice of the little country hamlet as their residence have be determine by the fact of their old friend , the reverend , have be nominate as the vicar . , the elder son , two month 's senior , have be engage to her for some year , and be , indeed , upon the point of marry her when the sudden financial crash have disarrange their plan . a sub-lieutenant in the , he be home on leave at present , and hardly an evening pass without his make his way from the to , where the reside . , however , a note have reach them to the effect that he have be suddenly order on duty , and that he must rejoin his ship at by the next evening . he would look in , be it but for half-an-hour , to bid them adieu . " why , where be ? " ask , blink round from side to side . " he be not come , father . how could you expect him to come on such a night as this ? why , there must be two foot of snow in the glebe field . " " not come , ? " croak the old man , throw himself down upon the sofa . " well , well , it only want him and his father to throw us over , and the thing will be complete . " " how can you even hint at such a thing , father ? " cry indignantly . " they have be as true as steel . what would they think if they hear you . " " i think , , " he say , disregard his daughter 's protest , " that i will have a drop , just the very small possible drop , of brandy . a mere thimbleful will do ; but i rather think i have catch cold during the snowstorm . " go on sketch stolidly in his folding book , but look up from her work . " i be afraid there be nothing in the house , father , " she say . " ! ! " he shake his head as one more in sorrow than in anger . " you be no longer a girl , ; you be a woman , the manager of a household , . we trust in you . we look entirely towards you . and yet you leave your poor brother without any brandy , to say nothing of me , your father . good heaven , ! what would your mother have say ? think of accident , think of sudden illness , think of apoplectic fit , . it be a very grave very grave very great risk that you run . " " i hardly touch the stuff , " say curtly ; " need not provide any for me . " " as a medicine it be invaluable , . to be use , you understand , and not to be abuse . that be the whole secret of it . but i will step down to the for half an hour . " " my dear father , " cry the young man " you surely be not go out upon such a night . if you must have brandy could i not send for some ? please let me send ; or i would go myself , -- " ! come a little paper pellet from his sister 's chair on to the sketch-book in front of him ! he unroll it and hold it to the light . " for 's sake let him go ! " be scrawl across it . " well , in any case , wrap yourself up warm , " he continue , lay bare his sudden change of front with a masculine clumsiness which horrify his sister . " perhaps it be not so cold as it look . you ca n't lose your way , that be one blessing . and it be not more than a hundred yard . " with many mumble and grumble at his daughter 's want of foresight , old struggle into his great-coat and wrap his scarf round his long thin throat . a sharp gust of cold wind make the lamp flicker as he throw open the . his two child listen to the dull fall of his footstep as he slowly pick out the wind garden path . " he get become intolerable , " say at last . " we should not have let him out ; he may make a public exhibition of himself . " " but it be 's last night , " plead . " it would be dreadful if they meet and he notice anything . that be why i wish him to go . " " then you be only just in time , " remark her brother , " for i hear the gate go , , you see . " as he speak a cheery hail come from outside , with a sharp rat-tat at the window . step out and throw open the door to admit a tall young man , whose black frieze jacket be all mottle and glisten with snow crystal . laugh loudly he shake himself like a dog , and kick the snow from his boot before enter the little room . 's profession be write in every line of his face . the clean-shaven lip and chin , the little fringe of side whisker , the straight decisive mouth , and the hard cheek all speak of the . fifty such face may be see any night of the year round the of the in which bear a close resemblance to each other than brother do commonly to brother . they be all cast in a common mould , the product of a system which teach early self-reliance , hardihood , and fine type upon the whole ; less refined and less intellectual , perhaps , than their brother of the land , but full of truth and energy and heroism . in figure he be straight , tall , and well-knit , with keen grey eye , and the sharp prompt manner of a man who have be accustom both to command and to obey . " you have my note ? " he say , as he enter the room . " i have to go again , . be n't it a bear ? be short-handed , and want me back at once . " he sit down by the girl , and put his brown hand across her white one . " it wo n't be a very large order this time , " he continue . " it be the fly squadron , , , and home . i should n't wonder if we be back in . " " it seem only the other day that you land . " she answer . " poor little girl ! but it wo n't be long . mind you take good care of her , when i be go . and when i come again , , it will be the last time mind ! hang the money ! there be plenty who manage on less . we need not have a house . why should we ? you can get very nice room in at 2 pound a week . , our paymaster , have just marry , and he only give thirty shilling . you would not be afraid , ? " " no , indeed . " " the dear old governor be so awfully cautious . wait , wait , wait , that be always his cry . i tell him that he ought to have be in the . but i will speak to him tonight . i will talk him round . see if i do n't . and you must speak to your own governor . here will back you up . and here be the port and the date that we be due at each . mind that you have a letter wait for me at every one . " he take a slip of paper from the side pocket of his coat , but , instead of hand it to the young lady , he remain stare at it with the utmost astonishment upon his face . " well , i never ! " he exclaim . " look here , ; what do you call this ? " " hold it to the light . why , it be a of note . nothing remarkable about it that i can see . " " on the contrary . it be the queer thing that ever happen to me . i ca n't make head or tail of it . " " come , then , , " cry with a challenge in her eye . " something very queer happen to me also . i will bet a pair of glove that my adventure be more out of the common than yours , though i have nothing so nice to show at the end of it . " " come , i will take that , and here shall be the judge . " " state your case . " the young artist shut up his sketch-book , and rest his head upon his hand with a face of mock solemnity . " lady first ! go along , though i think i know something of your adventure already . " " it be this morning , , " she say . " oh , by the way , the story will make you wild . i have forget that . however , you must n't mind , because , really , the poor fellow be perfectly mad . " " what on earth be it ? " ask the young officer , his eye travel from the bank-note to his fiancee " oh , it be harmless enough , and yet you will confess it be very queer . i have go out for a walk , but as the snow begin to fall i take shelter under the shed which the workman have build at the near end of the great new house . the man have go , you know , and the owner be suppose to be come , but the shed be still stand . i be sit there upon a packing-case when a man come down the road and stop under the same shelter . he be a quiet , man , very tall and thin , not much more than thirty , i should think , poorly dress , but with the look and bearing of a gentleman . he ask me one or two question about the village and the people , which , of course , i answer , until at last we find ourselves chat away in the pleasant and easy fashion about all sort of thing . the time pass so quickly that i forget all about the snow until he draw my attention to its have stop for the moment . then , just as i be turn to go , what in the world do you suppose that he do ? he take a step towards me , look in a sad pensive way into my face , and say : wonder whether you could care for me if i be without a penny . ' be n't it strange ? i be so frighten that i whisk out of the shed , and be off down the road before he could add another word . but really , , you need not look so black , for when i look back at it i can quite see from his tone and manner that he mean no harm . he be think aloud , without the least intention of be offensive . i be convince that the poor fellow be mad . " " hum ! there be some method in his madness , it seem to me , " remark her brother . " there would have be some method in my kick , " say the lieutenant savagely . " i never hear of a more outrageous thing in my life . " " now , i say that you would be wild ! " she lay her white hand upon the sleeve of his rough frieze jacket . " it be nothing . i shall never see the poor fellow again . he be evidently a stranger to this part of the country . but that be my little adventure . now let us have yours . " the young man crackle the bank-note between his finger and thumb , while he pass his other hand over his hair with the action of a man who strive to collect himself . " it be some ridiculous mistake , " he say . " i must try and set it right . yet i do n't know how to set about it either . i be go down to the village from the vicarage just after dusk when i find a fellow in a trap who have get himself into break water . one wheel have sink into the edge of the ditch which have be hide by the snow , and the whole thing be high and dry , with a list to starboard enough to slide him out of his seat . i lend a hand , of course , and soon have the wheel in the road again . it be quite dark , and i fancy that the fellow think that i be a bumpkin , for we do not exchange five word . as he drive off he shove this into my hand . it be the merest chance that i do not chuck it away , for , feel that it be a crumpled piece of paper , i imagine that it must be a tradesman 's advertisement or something of the kind . however , as luck would have it , i put it in my pocket , and there i find it when i look for the date of our cruise . now you know as much of the matter as i do . " brother and sister stare at the black and white crinkle note with astonishment upon their face . " why , your unknown traveller must have be , or at the least ! " say . " i be bind to say , , that i think you have lose your bet . " " oh , i be quite content to lose it . i never hear of such a piece of luck . what a perfectly delightful man this must be to know . " " but i ca n't take his money , " say , look somewhat ruefully at the note . " a little prize-money be all very well in its way , but a must draw the line somewhere . besides it must have be a mistake . and yet he mean to give me something big , for he could not mistake a note for a coin . i suppose i must advertise for the fellow . " " it seem a pity too , " remark . " i must say that i do n't quite see it in the same light that you do . " " indeed i think that you be very quixotic , , " say . " why should you not accept it in the spirit in which it be mean ? you do this stranger a a great service than you know he mean this as a little memento of the occasion . i do not see that there be any possible reason against your keep it . " " oh , come ! " say the young sailor , with an embarrassed laugh , " it be not quite the the sort of story one would care to tell at mess . " " in any case you be off morning , " observe . " you have no time to make inquiry about the mysterious . you must really make the good of it . " " well , look here , , you put it in your work-basket , " cry . " you shall be my banker , and if the rightful owner turn up then i can refer him to you . if not , i suppose we must look on it as a kind of , though i be bind to say i do n't feel entirely comfortable about it . " he rise to his foot , and throw the note down into the brown basket of coloured wool which stand beside her . " now , , i must up anchor , for i promise the governor to be back by nine . it wo n't be long this time , dear , and it shall be the last . good-bye , ! good luck ! " " good-bye , ! voyage ! the young artist remain by the table , while his sister follow her lover to the door . in the dim light of the hall he could see their figure and overhear their word . " next time , little girl ? " " next time be it , . " " and nothing can part us ? " " nothing . " " in the whole world ? " " nothing . " discreetly close the door . a moment later a thud from without , and the quick footstep crunch on the snow tell him that their visitor have depart . the snow have cease to fall , but for a week a hard frost have hold the country side in its iron grip . the road ring under the horse ' hoof , and every wayside ditch and runlet be a street of ice . over the long undulate landscape the red brick house peep out warmly against the spotless background , and the line of grey smoke stream straight up into the windless air . the sky be of the light pale blue , and the morning sun , shine through the distant of , strike a subdued glow from the snow field which might have gladden the eye of an artist . it do gladden the heart of one who view it that morning from the summit of the stand with his elbow upon a , his hat over his eye , and a short pipe in his mouth , look slowly about him , with the absorb air of one who breathe his fill of . beneath him to the north lie the village of , red wall , grey roof , and a scattered bristle of dark tree , with his own little nestle back from the broad , white wind . at the other side , as he slowly face round , lie a vast stone building , white and clear-cut , fresh from the builder ' hand . a great tower shoot up from one corner of it , and a hundred window twinkle ruddily in the light of the morning sun . a little distance from it stand a second small square low-lying structure , with a tall chimney rise from the midst of it , roll out a long plume of smoke into the frosty air . the whole vast structure stand within its own ground , enclose by a stately park wall , and surround by what would in time be an extensive plantation of . by the lodge gate a vast pile of debris , with line of shed for workman , and huge heap of plank from scaffolding , all proclaim that the work have only just be bring to an end . look down with curious eye at the building . it have long be a mystery and a subject of gossip for the whole country side . hardly a year have elapse since the rumour have first go about that a millionaire have buy a tract of land , and that it be his intention to build a country seat upon it . since then the work have be push on night and day , until now it be finish to the last detail in a short time than it take to build many a cottage . every morning two long special train have arrive from , carry down a great army of labourer , who be relieve in the evening by a fresh gang , who carry on their task under the ray of twelve enormous electric light . the number of workman appear to be only limit by the space into which they could be fit . great line of waggon convey the white stone from the depot by the station . hundred of busy toiler hand it over , shape and square , to the actual mason , who swing it up with steam crane on to the grow wall , where it be instantly fit and mortar by their companion . day by day the house shoot high , while pillar and cornice and carving seem to bud out from it as if by magic . nor be the work confine to the main building . a large separate structure spring up at the same time , and there come gang of man from with much extraordinary machinery , vast cylinder , wheel and wire , which they fit up in this outlying building . the great chimney which rise from the centre of it , combine with these strange furnishing , seem to mean that it be reserve as a factory or place of business , for it be rumour that this rich man 's hobby be the same as a poor man 's necessity , and that he be fond of work with his own hand amid chemical and furnace . scarce , too , be the second storey begin ere the and plumber and furnisher be busy beneath , carry out a thousand strange and costly scheme for the great comfort and convenience of the owner . singular storey be tell all round the country , and even in itself , of the extraordinary luxury and the absolute disregard for money which mark all these arrangement . no sum appear to be too great to spend upon the small detail which might do away with or lessen any of the petty inconvenience of life . waggon and waggon of the rich furniture have pass through the village between line of stare villager . costly skin , glossy carpet , rich rug , ivory , and ebony , and metal ; every glimpse into these storehouse of treasure have give rise to some new legend . and finally , when all have be arrange , there have come a staff of forty servant , who herald the approach of the owner , himself . it be no wonder , then , that it be with considerable curiosity that look down at the great house , and mark the smoking chimney , the curtain window , and the other sign which show that its tenant have arrive . a vast area of greenhouse gleam like a lake on the further side , and beyond be the long line of stable and outhouse . fifty horse have pass through the week before , so that , large as be the preparation , they be not more than would be need . who and what could this man be who spend his money with so lavish a hand ? his name be unknown . be as ignorant as as to his origin or the source of his wealth . brood languidly over the problem as he lean against the gate , puff his blue cloud of bird's-eye into the crisp , still air . suddenly his eye catch a dark figure emerge from the gate and stride up the wind road . a few minute bring him near enough to show a familiar face look over the stiff collar and from under the soft black hat of an english clergyman . " , . " " ah , , . how be you ? be you come my way ? how slippery the road be ! " his round , kindly face be beam with good nature , and he take little jump as he walk , like a man who can hardly contain himself for pleasure . " have you hear from ? " " oh , yes . he go off all right last from , and he will write from . but you generally have late news at than i have . " " i do n't know whether have hear . have you be up to see the new comer ? " " yes ; i have just leave him . " " be he a married ? " " no , he be a bachelor . he do not seem to have any relation either , as far as i could learn . he live alone , amid his huge staff of servant . it be a most remarkable establishment . it make me think of the . " " and the man ? what be he like ? " " he be an positive angel . i never hear or read of such kindness in my life . he have make me a happy man . " the clergyman 's eye sparkle with emotion , and he blow his nose loudly in his big red handkerchief . look at him in surprise . " i be delight to hear it , " he say . " may i ask what he have do ? " " i go up to him by appointment this morning . i have write ask him if i might call . i speak to him of the parish and its need , of my long struggle to restore the south side of the church , and of our effort to help my poor parishioner during this hard weather . while i speak he say not a word , but sit with a vacant face , as though he be not listen to me . when i have finish he take up his pen . ' how much will it take to do the church ? ' he ask . ' a thousand pound , ' i answer ; ' but we have already raise three hundred among ourselves . the have very handsomely give fifty pound . ' ' well , ' say he , ' how about the poor folk ? how many family be there ? ' ' about three hundred , ' i answer . ' and coal , i believe , be at about a pound a ton ' , say he . ' three ton ought to see them through the rest of the winter . then you can get a very fair pair of blanket for two pound . that would make five pound per family , and seven hundred for the church . ' he dip his pen in the ink , and , as i be a live man , , he write me a cheque then and there for two thousand two hundred pound . i do n't know what i say ; i feel like a fool ; i could not stammer out word with which to thank him . all my trouble have be take from my shoulder in an instant , and indeed , , i can hardly realise it . " " he must be a most charitable man . " " extraordinarily so . and so . one would think that it be i who be do the favour and he who be the beggar . i think of that passage about make the heart of the widow sing for joy . he make my heart sing for joy , i can tell you . be you come up to the vicarage ? " " no , thank you , . i must go home and get to work on my new picture . it be a five-foot landing of the roman in . i must have another try for the . . " he raise his hat and continue down the road , while the vicar turn off into the path which lead to his home . have convert a large bare room in the upper storey of into a studio , and thither he retreat after lunch . it be as well that he should have some little den of his own , for his father would talk of little save of his ledger and account , while have become peevish and querulous since the one tie which hold her to have be remove . the chamber be a bare and bleak one , and , but a good fire sparkle in the grate , and two large window give him the needful light . his easel stand in the centre , with the great canvas balance across it , while against the wall there lean his two last attempt , " the of of " and " the of . " have a weakness for large subject and broad effect . if his ambition be great than his skill , he have still all the love of his art and the patience under discouragement which be the stuff out of which successful painter be make . twice his brace of picture have journey to town , and twice they have come back to him , until the finely gilded frame which have make such a call upon his purse begin to show sign of these varied adventure . yet , in spite of their depressing company , turn to his fresh work with all the enthusiasm which a conviction of ultimate success can inspire . but he could not work that afternoon . in vain he dash in his background and outline the long curve of the galley . do what he would , his mind would still wander from his work to dwell upon his conversation with the vicar in the morning . his imagination be fascinate by the idea of this strange man live alone amid a crowd , and yet wield such a power that with one dash of his pen he could change sorrow into joy , and transform the condition of a whole parish . the incident of the note come back to his mind . it must surely have be with whom have come in contact . there could not be two man in one parish to whom so large a sum be of so small an account as to be throw to a bystander in return for a trifling piece of assistance . of course , it must have be . and his sister have the note , with instruction to return it to the owner , could he be find . he throw aside his palette , and descend into the sitting-room he tell and his father of his morning 's interview with the vicar , and of his conviction that this be the man of whom be in quest . " tut ! tut ! " say old . " how be this , ? i know nothing of this . what do woman know of money or of business ? hand the note over to me and i shall relieve you of all responsibility . i will take everything upon myself . " " i can possibly , papa , " say , with decision . " i should not think of part with it . " " what be the world come to ? " cry the old man , with his thin hand hold up in protest . " you grow more every day , . this money would be of use to use , you understand . it may be the of the vast business which i shall . i will use it , , and i will pay , shall we say , or even four and you may have it back on any day . and i will give security of , of my word of honour . " " it be quite impossible , papa , " his daughter answer coldly . " it be not my money . ask me to be his banker . those be his very word . it be not in my power to lend it . as to what you say , , you may be right or you may be wrong , but i certainly shall not give or anyone else the money without 's express command . " " you be very right about not give it to , " cry old , with many nod of approbation . " i should certainly not let it go out of the family . " " well , i think that i would tell you . " pick up his and stroll out to avoid the discussion between his father and sister , which he see be about to be renew . his artistic nature revolt at these petty and sordid dispute , and he turn to the crisp air and the broad landscape to soothe his ruffle feeling . avarice have no place among his failing , and his father 's perpetual chatter about money inspire him with a positive loathing and disgust for the subject . be lounge slowly along his favourite walk which curl over the hill , with his mind turn from the invasion to the mysterious millionaire , when his eye fall upon a tall , lean man in front of him , who , with a pipe between his lip , be endeavour to light a match under cover of his the man be clad in a rough pea-jacket , and bear trace of smoke and grime upon his face and hand . yet there be a freemasonry among smoker which override every social difference , so stop and hold out his case of fusee . " a light ? " say he . " thank you . " the man pick out a fusee , strike it , and bend his head to it . he have a pale , thin face , a short straggle beard , and a very sharp and curve nose , with decision and character in the straight thick eyebrow which almost meet on either side of it . clearly a superior kind of workman , and possibly one of those who have be employ in the construction of the new house . here be a chance of get some first-hand information on the question which have arouse his curiosity . wait until he have light his pipe , and then walk on beside him . " be you go in the direction of the new ? " he ask . " yes . " the man 's voice be cold , and his manner reserve . " perhaps you be engage in the building of it ? " " yes , i have a hand in it . " " they say that it be a wonderful place inside . it have be quite the talk of the district . be it as rich as they say ? " " i be sure i do n't know . i have not hear what they say . " his attitude be certainly not encouraging , and it seem to that he give little sidelong suspicious glance at him out of his keen grey eye . yet , if he be so careful and discreet there be the more reason to think that there be information to be extract , if he could but find a way to it . " ah , there it lie ! " he remark , as they top the brow of the hill , and look down once more at the great building . " well , no doubt it be very gorgeous and splendid , but really for my own part i would rather live in my own little box down yonder in the village . " the workman puff gravely at his pipe . " you be no great admirer of wealth , then ? " he say . " not i. i should not care to be a penny rich than i be . of course i should like to sell my picture . one must make a living . but beyond that i ask nothing . i dare say that i , a poor artist , or you , a man who work for your bread , have more happiness out of life than the owner of that great palace . " " indeed , i think that it be more than likely , " the other answer , in a much more conciliatory voice . " art , " say , warm to the subject , " be her own reward . what mere bodily indulgence be there which money could buy which can give that deep thrill of satisfaction which come on the man who have conceive something new , something beautiful , and the daily delight as he see it grow under his hand , until it stand before him a complete whole ? with my art and without wealth i be happy . without my art i should have a void which no money could fill . but i really do n't know why i should say all this to you . " the workman have stop , and be stare at him earnestly with a look of the deep interest upon his feature . " i be very glad to hear what you say , " say he . " it be a pleasure to know that the worship of gold be not quite universal , and that there be at least some who can rise above it . would you mind my shake you by the hand ? " it be a somewhat extraordinary request , but rather pride himself upon his , and upon his happy facility for make friend with all sort and condition of man . he readily exchange a cordial grip with his chance acquaintance . " you express some curiosity as to this house . i know the ground pretty well , and might perhaps show you one or two little thing which would interest you . here be the gate . will you come in with me ? " here be , indeed , a chance . eagerly assent , and walk up the wind drive amid the grow . when he find his uncouth guide , however , march straight across the broad , gravel square to the main entrance , he feel that he have place himself in a false position . " surely not through the front door , " he whisper , pluck his companion by the sleeve . " perhaps might not like it . " " i do n't think there will be any difficulty , " say the other , with a quiet smile . " my name be . " 's face must have express the utter astonishment which fill his mind at this most unlooked-for announcement . for a moment he think that his companion must be joke , but the ease and assurance with which he lounge up the step , and the deep respect with which a functionary in the hall swing open the door to admit him , show that he speak in sober earnest . raffle glance back , and see the look of absolute amazement upon the young artist 's feature , he chuckle quietly to himself . " you will forgive me , wo n't you , for not disclose my identity ? " he say , lay his hand with a friendly gesture upon the other 's sleeve . " have you know me you would have speak less freely , and i should not have have the opportunity of learn your true worth . for example , you might hardly have be so frank upon the matter of wealth have you know that you be speak to the master of the . " " i do n't think that i be ever so astonish in my life , " gasp . " naturally you be . how could you take me for anything but a workman ? so i be . chemistry be one of my hobby , and i spend hour a day in my laboratory yonder . i have only just strike work , and as i have inhale some gas , i think that a turn down the road and a whiff of tobacco might do me good . that be how i come to meet you , and my toilet , i fear , correspond only too well with my face . but i rather fancy i know you by repute . your name be , be it not ? " " yes , though i can imagine how you know . " " well , i naturally take some little trouble to learn something of my neighbour . i have hear that there be an artist of that name , and i presume that artist be not very numerous in . but how do you like the design ? i hope it do not offend your trained taste . " " indeed , it be ! you must yourself have an extraordinary eye for effect . " " oh , i have no taste at all ; not the slight . i can tell good from bad . there never be such a complete philistine . but i have the good man in down , and another fellow from . they fix it up between them . " they have be stand just within the folding door upon a huge mat of bison skin . in front of them lie a great square court , pave with marble lay out in a labyrinth of arabesque design . in the centre a high fountain of carve jade shoot five thin feather of spray into the air , four of which curve towards each corner of the court to descend into broad marble basin , while the fifth mount straight up to an immense height , and then tinkle back into the central reservoir . on either side of the court a tall , graceful palm-tree shoot up its slender stem to break into a crown of droop green leave some fifty foot above their head . all round be a series of moorish arch , in jade and serpentine marble , with heavy curtain of the deep purple to cover the door which lay between them . in front , to right and to left , a broad staircase of marble , carpet with rich thick rug work , lead upwards to the upper storey , which be arrange around the central court . the temperature within be warm and yet fresh , like the air of an . " it be take from the , " say . " the be pretty . they strike right through the building into the ground beneath , and their root be all girt round with hot-water pipe . they seem to thrive very well . " " what beautifully delicate ! " cry , look up with admire eye at the bright and infinitely fragile metal trellis screen which adorn the space between the moorish arch . " it be rather neat . but it be not . brass be not tough enough to allow them to work it to that degree of fineness . it be gold . but just come this way with me . you wo n't mind wait while i remove this smoke ? " he lead the way to a door upon the leave side of the court , which , to 's surprise , swing slowly open as they approach it . " that be a little improvement which i have adopt , " remark the master of the house . " as you go up to a door your weight upon the plank release a spring which cause the hinge to revolve . pray step in . this be my own little sanctum , and furnish after my own heart . " if expect to see some fresh exhibition of wealth and luxury he be woefully disappoint , for he find himself in a large but bare room , with a little iron truckle-bed in one corner , a few scattered wooden chair , a dingy carpet , and a large table heap with book , bottle , paper , and all the other debris which collect around a busy and untidy man . motion his visitor into a chair , pull off his coat , and , turn up the sleeve of his coarse flannel shirt , he begin to plunge and scrub in the warm water which flow from a tap in the wall . " you see how simple my own taste be , " he remark , as he mop his drip face and hair with the towel . " this be the only room in my great house where i find myself in a congenial atmosphere . it be homely to me . i can read here and smoke my pipe in peace . anything like luxury be abhorrent to me . " " really , i should not have though it , " observe . " it be a fact , i assure you . you see , even with your view as to the worthlessness of wealth , view which , i be sure , be very sensible and much to your credit , you must allow that if a man should happen to be the possessor of , let us say of of money , it be his duty to get that money into circulation , so that the community may be the good for it . there be the secret of my fine feather . i have to exert all my ingenuity in order to spend my income , and yet keep the money in legitimate channel . for example , it be very easy to give money away , and no doubt i could dispose of my surplus , or part of my surplus , in that fashion , but i have no wish to pauperise anyone , or to do mischief by indiscriminate charity . i must exact some sort of money 's worth for all the money which i lie out you see my point , do n't you ? " " entirely ; though really it be something novel to hear a man complain of the difficulty of spend his income . " " i assure you that it be a very serious difficulty with me . but i have hit upon some very pretty plan . will you wash your hand ? well , then , perhaps you would care to have a look round . just come into this corner of the room , and sit upon this chair . so . now i will sit upon this one , and we be ready to start . " the angle of the chamber in which they sit be paint for about six foot in each direction of a dark , and be furnish with two red plush seat protrude from the wall , and in striking contrast with the simplicity of the rest of the apartment . " this , " remark , " be a lift , though it be so closely join to the rest of the room that without the change in colour it might puzzle you to find the division . it be make to run either horizontally or vertically . this line of knob represent the various room . you can see ' , ' ' , ' ' , ' ' ' and so on , upon them . i will show you the upward action . i press this one with ' ' upon it . " there be a sense of motion , a very slight jar , and , without move from his seat , be conscious that the room have vanish , and that a large arched oaken door stand in the place which it have occupy . " that be the kitchen door , " say . " i have my kitchen at the top of the house . i can tolerate the smell of cooking . we have come up eighty foot in a very few second . now i press again and here we be in my room once more . " stare about him in astonishment . " the wonder of science be great than those of magic , " he remark . " yes , it be a pretty little mechanism . now we try the horizontal . i press the ' ' knob and here we be , you see . step towards the door , and you will find it open in front of you . " do as he be bid , and find himself with his companion in a large and lofty room , while the lift , the instant that it be free from their weight , flash back to its original position . with his foot sink into the soft rich carpet , as though he be in some mossy bank , he stare about him at the great picture which line the wall . " surely , surely , i see 's touch there , " he cry , point up at the one which face him . " yes , it be a , and i believe one of his good . i have a very exciting bid for it with the french government . they want it for the , but of course at an auction the long purse must win . " " and this ' of ' must be a . one can mistake his splendid man and his infamous woman . " " yes , it be a . the other two be a and a , fair specimen of the spanish and of the dutch school . i have only old master here . the modern be in the billiard-room . the furniture here be a little curious . in fact , i fancy that it be unique . it be make of ebony and ' horn . you see that the leg of everything be of spiral ivory , both the table and the chair . it cost the upholsterer some little pain , for the supply of these thing be a strictly limited one . curiously enough , the have give a large order for ' horn to repair some ancient pagoda , which be fence in with them , but i outbid him in the market , and his celestial highness have have to wait . there be a lift here in the corner , but we do not need it . step through this door . this be the billiard-room , " he continue as they advance into the adjoining room . " you see i have a few recent picture of merit upon the wall . here be a , two , a , a , an , and two . it seem to me to be a pity to hang picture over these wall of carve oak . look at those bird hop and sing in the branch . they really seem to move and twitter , do n't they ? " " they be perfect . i never see such exquisite work . but why do you call it a billiard-room , ? i do not see any board . " " oh , a board be such a clumsy uncompromising piece of furniture . it be always in the way unless you actually need to use it . in this case the board be cover by that square of polished maple which you see let into the floor . now i put my foot upon this motor . you see ! " as he speak , the central portion of the flooring fly up , and a most beautiful billiard-table rise up to its proper position . he press a second spring , and a appear in the same fashion . " you may have or what you will by set the lever in motion , " he remark . " but all this be very trifling . perhaps we may find something in the museum which may be of more interest to you . " he lead the way into another chamber , which be furnish in antique style , with hanging of the rare and rich tapestry . the floor be a mosaic of coloured marble , scatter over with mat of costly fur . there be little furniture , but a number of cabinet of ebony and silver with plaque be range round the apartment . " it be perhaps hardly fair to dignify it by the name of a museum , " say . " it consist merely of a few elegant trifle which i have pick up here and there . gem be my strong point . i fancy that there , perhaps , i might challenge comparison with any private collector in the world . i lock them up , for even the good servant may be tempt . " he take a silver key from his watch chain , and begin to unlock and draw out the drawers . a cry of wonder and of admiration burst from , as his eye rest upon case after case fill with the most magnificent stone . the deep still red of the ruby , the clear scintillate green of the emerald , the hard glitter of the diamond , the many shift shade of beryl , of amethyst , of onyx , of , of opal , of agate , of cornelian seem to fill the whole chamber with a vague twinkling , light . long slab of the beautiful blue lazuli , magnificent bloodstone , specimen of pink and red and white coral , long string of lustrous pearl , all these be toss out by their owner as a careless schoolboy might pour marble from his bag . " this be n't bad , " he say , hold up a great glowing yellow mass as large as his own head . " it be really a very fine piece of amber . it be forward to me by my agent at the . pound , it weigh . i never hear of so fine a one . i have no very large be no very large one in the my average be good . pretty toy , be they not ? " he pick up a double handful of emerald from a drawer , and then let them trickle slowly back into the heap . " good heaven ! " cry , as he gaze from case to case . " it be an immense fortune in itself . surely a hundred thousand pound would hardly buy so splendid a collection . " " i do n't think that you would do for a valuer of precious stone , " say , laugh . " why , the content of that one little drawer of could not be buy for the sum which you name . i have a memo . here of what i have expend up to date on my collection , though i have agent at work who will probably make very considerable addition to it within the next few week . as matter stand , however , i have me one forty thousand ; emerald , seven fifty ; ruby , eight forty ; , nine twenty ; have several very nice thirty . other gem , carbuncle , ! yes , it figure out at just over four million seven hundred and forty thousand . i dare say that we may say five million , for i have not count the odd money . " " good gracious ! " cry the young artist , with stare eye . " i have a certain feeling of duty in the matter . you see the cutting , polishing , and general sale of stone be one of those industry which be entirely dependent upon wealth . if we do not support it , it must languish , which mean misfortune to a considerable number of people . the same apply to the gold filigree work which you notice in the court . wealth have its responsibility , and the encouragement of these handicraft be among the most obvious of them . here be a nice ruby . it be burmese , and the fifth large in existence . i be incline to think that if it be uncut it would be the second , but of course cutting take away a great deal . " he hold up the blaze red stone , about the size of a chestnut , between his finger and thumb for a moment , and then throw it carelessly back into its drawer . " come into the smoking-room , " he say ; " you will need some little refreshment , for they say that sight-seeing be the most exhausting occupation in the world . " the chamber in which the bewilder now find himself be more luxurious , if less rich , than any which he have yet see . low settee of plush be scatter in orderly disorder over a mossy eastern carpet . deep lounge , recline sofa , american rocking-chair , all be to be have for the choosing . one end of the room be wall by glass , and appear to open upon a luxuriant hot-house . at the further end a double line of gilt rail support a profusion of the most recent magazine and periodical . a rack at each side of the inlaid fireplace sustain a long line of the pipe of all place and , french briar , german , carve meerschaum , scent cedar and , with eastern , turkish , and two great hookah . to right and left be a series of small locker , extend in a treble row for the whole length of the room , with the name of the various brand of tobacco scroll in ivory work across them . above be other large tier of polished oak , which hold cigar and cigarette . " try that settee , " say the master of the house , as he throw himself into a rocking-chair . " it be from the 's upholsterer . the have a very good notion of comfort . i be a confirm smoker myself , , so i have be able , perhaps , to check my architect here more than in most of the other department . of picture , for example , i know nothing , as you would very speedily find out . on a tobacco , i might , perhaps , offer an opinion . now draw out some long , , be really something a little out of the common . do try one . " light the weed which be offer to him , and lean back luxuriously amid his cushion , gaze through the blue balmy fragrant at the extraordinary man in the dirty pea-jacket who speak of million as another might of sovereign . with his pale face , his sad , languid air , and his bow shoulder , it be as though he be crush down under the weight of his own gold . there be a mute apology , an attitude of deprecation in his manner and speech , which be strangely at variance with the immense power which he wield . to the whole whimsical incident have be intensely interesting and amusing . his artistic nature blossom out in this atmosphere of perfect luxury and comfort , and he be conscious of a sense of repose and of absolute sensual contentment such as he have never before experience . " shall it be coffee , or wine , or , or perhaps something strong , " ask , stretch out his hand to what look like a project from the wall . " i can recommend the tokay . i have it from the man who supply the of , though i think i may say that i get the cream of it . " he strike twice upon one of the , and sit expectant . with a sharp click at the end of ten second a slide shutter fly open , and a small tray protrude bear two long taper venetian glass fill with wine . " it work very nicely , " say . " it be quite a new before do , as far as i know . you see the name of the various wine and so on print on the note . by press the note down i complete an electric circuit which cause the tap in the cellar beneath to remain open long enough to fill the glass which always stand beneath it . the glass , you understand , stand upon a revolving drum , so that there must always be one there . the glass be then bring up through a pneumatic tube , which be set work by the increase weight of the glass when the wine be add to it . it be a pretty little idea . but i be afraid that i bear you rather with all these petty contrivance . it be a whim of mine to push mechanism as far as it will go . " " on the contrary , i be fill with interest and wonder , " say warmly . " it be as if i have be suddenly whip up out of prosaic old and transfer in an instant to some enchant palace , some eastern home of the . i could not have believe that there exist upon this earth such adaptation of mean to an end , such complete mastery of every detail which may aid in strip life of any of its petty worry . " " i have something yet to show you , " remark ; " but we will rest here for a few minute , for i wish to have a word with you . how be the cigar ? " " most excellent . " " it be roll in in the old slavery day . there be nothing make like them now . the man who have them do not know their value . he let them go at merely a few shilling apiece . now i want you to do me a favour , . " " i shall be so glad . " " you can see more or less how i be situate . i be a complete stranger here . with the well-to-do class i have little in common . i be no society man . i do n't want to call or be call on . i be a student in a small way , and a man of quiet taste . i have no social ambition at all . do you understand ? " " entirely . " " on the other hand , my experience of the world have be that it be the rare thing to be able to form a friendship with a poor mean with a man who be at all eager to increase his income . they think much of your wealth , and little of yourself . i have try , you understand , and i know . " he pause and run his finger through his thin beard . nod to show that he appreciate his position . " now , you see , " he continue , " if i be to be cut off from the rich by my own taste , and from those who be not rich by my distrust of their motive , my situation be an isolated one . not that i mind isolation : i be use to it . but it limit my field of usefulness . i have no trustworthy means of inform myself when and where i may do good . i have already , i be glad to say , meet a man , your vicar , who appear to be thoroughly unselfish and trustworthy . he shall be one of my channel of communication with the outer world . might i ask you whether you would be willing to become another ? " " with the great pleasure , " say eagerly . the proposition fill his heart with joy , for it seem to give him an almost official connection with this paradise of a house . he could not have ask for anything more to his taste . " i be fortunate enough to discover by your conversation how high a ground you take in such matter , and how entirely disinterested you be . you may have observe that i be short and almost rude with you at first . i have have reason to fear and suspect all chance friendship . too often they have prove to be carefully plan beforehand , with some sordid object in view . good heaven , what story i could tell you ! a lady pursue by a have risk my life to save her , and have learn afterwards that the scene have be arrange by the mother as an effective introduction , and that the bull have be hire by the hour . but i wo n't shake your faith in human nature . i have have some rude shock myself . i look , perhaps , with a jaundice eye on all who come near me . it be the more needful that i should have one whom i can trust to advise me . " " if you will only show me where my opinion can be of any use i shall be most happy , " say . " my people come from , but i know most of the folk here and their position . " " that be just what i want . money can do so much good , and it may do so much harm . i shall consult you when i be in doubt . by the way , there be one small question which i might ask you now . can you tell me who a young lady be with very dark hair , grey eye , and a finely chiselled face ? she wear a blue dress when i see her , with about her neck and cuff . " chuckle to himself . " i know that dress pretty well , " he say . " it be my sister whom you describe . " " your sister ! really ! why , there be a resemblance , now that my attention be call to it . i see her the other day , and wonder who she might be . she live with you , of course ? " " yes ; my father , she , and i live together at . " " where i hope to have the pleasure of make their acquaintance . you have finish your cigar ? have another , or try a pipe . to the real smoker all be mere trifle save the pipe . i have most brand of tobacco here . the locker be fill on the , and on they be hand over to the old folk at the alms-house , so i manage to keep it pretty fresh always . well , if you wo n't take anything else , perhaps you would care to see one or two of the other effect which i have devise . on this side be the armoury , and beyond it the library . my collection of book be a limited one ; there be just over the fifty thousand volume . but it be to some extent remarkable for quality . i have a visigoth bible of the fifth century , which i rather fancy be unique ; there be a ' ' of @card@ ; a ms . of do upon mulberry leave , probably of the second century ; a ' and ' of the eighth century ; and some hundred , with five very fine specimen of and . but those you may turn over any wet afternoon when you have nothing well to do . meanwhile , i have a little device connect with this smoking-room which may amuse you . light this other cigar . now sit with me upon this lounge which stand at the further end of the room . " the sofa in question be in a niche which be line in three side and above with perfectly clear transparent crystal . as they sit down the master of the house draw a cord which pull out a crystal shutter behind them , so that they be enclose on all side in a great box of glass , so pure and so highly polish that its presence might very easily be forget . a number of golden cord with crystal handle hang down into this small chamber , and appear to be connect with a long shine bar outside . " now , where would you like to smoke your cigar ? " say , with a twinkle in his demure eye . " shall we go to , or to , or to , or -- " " to , " say . there be a twinkle , a whirr , and a sense of motion . the young artist gaze about him in absolute amazement . look where he would all round be tree-fern and palm with long droop creeper , and a blaze of brilliant orchid . smoking-room , house , , all be go , and he sit on a settee in the heart of a virgin forest of the . it be no mere optical delusion or trick . he could see the hot steam rise from the tropical undergrowth , the heavy drop fall from the huge green leave , the very grain and fibre of the rough bark which clothe the trunk . even as he gaze a green mottle snake curl noiselessly over a branch above his head , and a paroquet break suddenly from amid the foliage and flash off among the . gaze around , speechless with surprise , and finally turn upon his host a face in which curiosity be not with a suspicion of fear . " people have be burn for less , have they not ? " cry laugh heartily . " have you have enough of the amazon ? what do you say to a spell of ? " again the whirr , the swift flash of pass object , and in an instant a huge desert stretch on every side of them , as far as the eye could reach . in the foreground a clump of five towered into the air , with a profusion of rough plant bristle from their base . on the other side rise a rugged , gnarled , grey monolith , carve at the base into a huge scarabaeus . a group of lizard play about on the surface of the old carve stone . beyond , the yellow sand stretch away into furthest space , where the dim mirage mist play along the horizon . " , i can understand it ! " grasp the velvet edge of the settee , and gaze wildly about him . " the effect be rather startling , be it not ? this egyptian desert be my favourite when i lie myself out for a contemplative smoke . it seem strange that tobacco should have come from the busy , practical . it have much more affinity for the dreamy , languid . but perhaps you would like to run over to for a change ? " " not , " say , pass his hand over his forehead . " i feel rather confused by all these wonder , and indeed i think that they have affect my nerve a little . besides , it be time that i return to my prosaic , if i can find my way out of this wilderness to which you have transplant me . but would you ease my mind , , by show me how this thing be do ? " " it be the merest complex plaything , nothing more . allow me to explain . i have a line of very large greenhouse which extend from one end of my smoking-room . these different house be keep at vary degree of heat and humidity so as to reproduce the exact climate of , , and the rest . you see , our crystal chamber be a tramway run with a minimum of friction along a steel rod . by pull this or that handle i regulate how far it shall go , and it travel , as you have see , with amazing speed . the effect of my hot-house be heighten by the roof be invariably conceal by sky , which be really very admirably paint , and by the introduction of bird and other creature , which seem to flourish quite as well in artificial as in natural heat . this explain the south american effect . " " but not the egyptian . " " no. it be certainly rather clever . i have the good man in , at least the good at those large effect , to paint in that circular background . you understand , the palm , cactus , obelisk , and so on , be perfectly genuine , and so be the sand for fifty yard or so , and i defy the man in to tell where the deception commence . it be the familiar and perhaps rather meretricious effect of a circular panorama , but carry out in the most complete manner . be there any other point ? " " the crystal box ? why be it ? " " to preserve my guest from the effect of the change of temperature . it would be a poor kindness to bring them back to my smoking-room drench through , and with the seed of a violent cold . the crystal have to be keep warm , too , otherwise vapour would deposit , and you would have your view spoil . but must you really go ? then here we be back in the smoking-room . i hope that it will not be your last visit by many a one . and if i may come down to i should be very glad to do so . this be the way through the museum . " as emerge from the balmy aromatic atmosphere of the great house , into the harsh , raw , biting air of an english winter evening , he feel as though he have be away for a long visit in some foreign country . time be measure by impression , and so vivid and novel have be his feeling , that week and week might have elapse since his chat with the stranger in the road . he walk along with his head in a whirl , his whole mind possess and intoxicate by the one idea of the boundless wealth and the immense power of this extraordinary stranger . small and sordid and mean seem his own as he approach it , and he pass over its threshold full of restless discontent against himself and his surroundings . that night after supper pour forth all that he have see to his father and to his sister . so full be he of the one subject that it be a relief to him to share his knowledge with other . rather for his own sake , then , than for theirs he depict vividly all the marvel which he have see ; the profusion of wealth , the regal treasure-house of gem , the gold , the marble , the extraordinary device , the absolute lavishness and complete disregard for money which be show in every detail . for an hour he picture with glow word all the wonder which have be show him , and end with some pride by describe the request which have make , and the complete confidence which he have place in him . his word have a very different effect upon his two listener . lean back in his chair with a bitter smile upon his lip , his thin face crinkle into a thousand pucker , and his small eye shine with envy and greed . his lean yellow hand upon the table be clench until the knuckle gleam white in the lamplight . , on the other hand , lean forward , her lip part , drink in her brother 's word with a glow of colour upon either cheek . it seem to , as he glance from one to the other of them , that he have never see his father look so evil , or his sister so beautiful . " who be the fellow , then ? " ask the old man after a considerable pause . " i hope he get all this in an honest fashion . five million in jewel , you say . good gracious me ! ready to give it away , too , but afraid of pauperise any one . you can tell him , , that you know of one very deserving case which have not the slight objection to be pauperise . " " but who can he possibly be , ? " cry . " can be his real name . he must be some disguised prince , or perhaps a king in exile . oh , i should have love to have see those diamond and the emerald ! i always think that emerald suit dark people well . you must tell me again all about that museum , . " " i do n't think that he be anything more than he pretend to be , " her brother answer . " he have the plain , quiet manner of an ordinary middle-class englishman . there be no particular polish that i could see . he know a little about book and picture , just enough to appreciate them , but nothing more . no , i fancy that he be a man quite in our own position of life , who have in some way inherit a vast sum . of course it be difficult for me to form an estimate , but i should judge that what i see , picture , jewel , book , and so never have be buy under twenty million , and i be sure that that figure be entirely an . " " i never know but one , " say old , drum his finger on the table ; " he be a foreman in my department . but he be an elderly single man . well , i hope he get it all honestly . i hope the money be clean . " " and really , really , he be come to see us ! " cry , clap her hand . " oh , when do you think he will come , ? do give me warning . do you think it will be ? " " i be sure i can say . " " i should so love to see him . i do n't know when i have be so interested . " " why , you have a letter there , " remark . " from , too , by the foreign stamp . how be he ? " " it only come this evening . i have not open it yet . to tell the truth , i have be so interested in your story that i have forget all about it . poor old ! it be from . " she glance rapidly over the four page of straggle writing in the young sailor 's bold hand . " oh , he be all right , " she say . " they have a gale on the way out , and that sort of thing , but he be all right now . he think he may be back by . i wonder whether your new friend will come knight of the enchant . " " hardly so soon , i should fancy . " " if he should be look about for an investment . , " say the father , " you wo n't forget to tell him what a fine opening there be now in the gun trade . with my knowledge , and a few thousand at my back , i could bring him in his thirty per cent . as regular as the bank . after all , he must lay out his money somehow . he can sink it all in book and precious stone . i be sure that i could give him the high reference . " " it may be a long time before he come , father , " say coldly ; " and when he do i be afraid that i can hardly use his friendship as a means of advance your interest . " " we be his equal , father , " cry with spirit . " would you put us on the footing of beggar ? he would think we care for him only for his money . i wonder that you should think of such a thing . " " if i have not think of such thing where would your education have be , miss ? " retort the angry old man ; and steal quietly away to his room , whence amid his canvas he could still hear the hoarse voice and the clear in their never-end family jangle . more and more sordid seem the surroundings of his life , and more and more to be value the peace which money can buy . breakfast have hardly be clear in the morning , and have not yet ascend to his work , when there come a timid tap at the door , and there be on the mat outside . run out and welcome him with all cordiality . " i be afraid that i be a very early visitor , " he say apologetically ; " but i often take a walk after breakfast . " he have no trace of work upon him now , but be trim and neat with a dark suit , and carefully brush hair . " you speak yesterday of your work . perhaps , early as it be , you would allow me the privilege of look over your studio ? " " pray step in , , " cry , all in a flutter at this advance from so munificent a patron of art ; " i should be only too happy to show you such little work as i have on hand , though , indeed , i be almost afraid when i think how familiar you be with some of the great masterpiece . allow me to introduce you to my father and to my sister . " bow low and rub his thin hand together ; but the young lady give a gasp of surprise , and stare with eye at the millionaire . step forward , however , and shake her quietly by the hand , " i expect to find that it be you , " he say . " i have already meet your sister , , on the very first day that i come here . we take shelter in a shed from a snowstorm , and have quite a pleasant little chat . " " i have no notion that i be speak to the owner of the , " say in some confusion . " how funnily thing turn out , to be sure ! " " i have often wonder who it be that i speak to , but it be only yesterday that i discover . what a sweet little place you have here ! it must be charming in summer . why , if it be not for this hill my window would look straight across at yours . " " yes , and we should see all your beautiful plantation , " say , stand beside him in the window . " i be wish only yesterday that the hill be not there . " " really ! i shall be happy to have it remove for you if you would like it . " " good gracious ! " cry . " why , where would you put it ? " " oh , they could run it along the line and dump it anywhere . it be not much of a hill . a few thousand man with proper machinery , and a line of rail bring right up to them could easily dispose of it in a few month . " " and the poor vicar 's house ? " ask , laugh . " i think that might be get over . we could run him up a facsimile , which would , perhaps , be more convenient to him . your brother will tell you that i be quite an expert at the design of house . but , seriously , if you think it would be an improvement i will see what can be do . " " not for the world , . why , i should be a traitor to the whole village if i be to encourage such a scheme . the hill be the one thing which give the slight individuality . it would be the height of selfishness to sacrifice it in order to improve the view from . " " it be a little box of a place this , , " say old . " i should think you must feel quite stifle in it after your grand mansion , of which my son tell me such wonder . but we be not always accustom to this sort of thing , . humble as i stand here , there be a time , and not so long ago , when i could write as many figure on a cheque as any in . it -- " " he be a dear discontent old papa , " cry , throw her arm round him in a caress manner . he give a sharp squeak and a grimace of pain , which he endeavour to hide by an outbreak of painfully artificial cough . " shall we go upstairs ? " say hurriedly , anxious to divert his guest 's attention from this little domestic incident . " my studio be the real atelier , for it be right up under the tile . i shall lead the way , if you will have the kindness to follow me . " leave and , they go up together to the workroom . stand long in front of the " of , " and the " of a , " screw up his eye and twitch nervously at his beard , while stand by in anxious expectancy . " and how much be these ? " ask at last . " i price them at a hundred apiece when i send them to . " " then the good i can wish you be that the day may come when you would gladly give ten time the sum to have them back again . i be sure that there be great possibility in you , and i see that in grouping and in boldness of design you have already achieve much . but your drawing , if you will excuse my say so , be just a little crude , and your colouring perhaps a trifle thin . now , i will make a bargain with you , , if you will consent to it . i know that money have no charm for you , but still , as you say when i first meet you , a man must live . i shall buy these two canvas from you at the price which you name , subject to the condition that you may always have them back again by repay the same sum . " " you be really very kind . " hardly know whether to be delight at have sell his picture or humiliate at the frank criticism of the buyer . " may i write a cheque at once ? " say . " here be pen and ink . so ! i shall send a couple of footman down for them in the afternoon . well , i shall keep them in trust for you . i dare say that when you be famous they will be of value as specimen of your early manner . " " i be sure that i be extremely oblige to you , , " say the young artist , place the cheque in his notebook . he glance at it as he fold it up , in the vague hope that perhaps this man of whim have assess his picture at a high rate than he have name . the figure , however , be exact . begin dimly to perceive that there be drawback as well as advantage to the reputation of a , which he have gain by a few chance word , prompt rather by the reaction against his father be than by his own real conviction . " i hope , , " say , when they have descend to the sitting-room once more , " that you will do me the honour of come to see the little curiosity which i have gather together . your brother will , i be sure , escort you up ; or perhaps would care to come ? " " i shall be delight to come , , " cry , with her sweet smile . " a good deal of my time just now be take up in look after the poor people , who find the cold weather very try . " raise his eyebrow , for it be the first he have hear of his sister 's mission of mercy , but nod approvingly . " be tell us of your wonderful hot-house . i be sure i wish i could transport the whole parish into one of them , and give them a good warm . " " nothing would be easy , but i be afraid that they might find it a little try when they come out again . i have one house which be only just finish . your brother have not see it yet , but i think it be the good of them all . it represent an indian jungle , and be hot enough in all conscience . " " i shall so look forward to see it , " cry , clasp her hand . " it have be one of the dream of my life to see . i have read so much of it , the temple , the forest , the great river , and the tiger . why , you would hardly believe it , but i have never see a tiger except in a picture . " " that can easily be set right , " say , with his quiet smile . " would you care to see one ? " " oh , immensely . " " i will have one send down . let me see , it be nearly twelve o'clock . i can get a wire to by one . there be a man there who deal in such thing . i should think he would be due morning . well , i shall look forward to see you all before very long . i have rather outstay my time , for i be a man of routine , and i always put in a certain number of hour in my laboratory . " he shake hand cordially with them all , and light his pipe at the doorstep , stroll off upon his way . " well , what do you think of him now ? " ask , as they watch his black figure against the white snow . " i think that he be no more fit to be trust with all that money than a child , " cry the old man . " it make me positively sick to hear him talk of move hill and buy tiger , and nonsense , when there be honest man without a business , and great business starve for a little capital . it be be what i call it . " " i think he be most delightful , , " say . " remember , you have promise to take us up to the . and he evidently wish us to go soon . do n't you think we might go this afternoon ? " " i hardly think that , . you leave it in my hand , and i will arrange it all . and now i must get to work , for the light be so very short on these winter day . " that night have go to bed , and be doze off when a hand pluck at his shoulder , and he start up to find his sister in some white drapery , with a shawl throw over her shoulder , stand beside him in the moonlight . " , dear , " she whisper , stoop over him , " there be something i want to ask you , but papa be always in the way . you will do something to please me , wo n't you , ? " " of course , . what be it ? " " i do so hate have my affair talk over , dear . if say anything to you about me , or ask any question , please do n't say anything about . you wo n't , will you , , for the sake of your little sister ? " " no ; not unless you wish it . " " there be a dear good brother . " she stoop over him and kiss him tenderly . it be a rare thing for to show any emotion , and her brother marvel sleepily over it until he relapse into his interrupted doze . the family be seat at breakfast on the morning which follow the first visit of , when they be surprise to hear the buzz and hum of a multitude of voice in the village street . near and near come the tumult , and then , of a sudden , two madden horse rear themselves up on the other side of the garden hedge , prance and paw , with ear lay back and eye ever glance at some horror behind them . two man hang shout to their bridle , while a third come rush up the curve gravel path . before the could realise the situation , their maid , , dart into the sitting-room with terror in her round freckled face : " if you please , miss , " she scream , " your tiger have . " " good heaven ! " cry , rush to the door with his half-filled teacup in his hand . " this be too much . here be an iron cage on a with a great ramp tiger , and the whole village with their mouth open . " " mad as a hatter ! " shriek old . " i could see it in his eye . he spend enough on this beast to start me in business . whoever hear of such a thing ? tell the driver to take it to the police-station . " " nothing of the sort , papa , " say , rise with dignity and wrap a shawl about her shoulder . her eye be shine , her cheek flush , and she carry herself like a triumphant queen . , with his teacup in his hand , allow his attention to be divert from their strange visitor while he gaze at his beautiful sister . " have do this out of kindness to me , " she say , sweep towards the door . " i look upon it as a great attention on his part . i shall certainly go out and look at it . " " if you please , sir , " say the carman , reappear at the door , " it be all as we can do to ' old in the ' . " " let us all go out together then , " suggest . they go as far as the garden fence and stare over , while the whole village , from the school-child to the old man from the almshouse , gather round in mute astonishment . the tiger , a long , lithe , creature , with two blaze green eye , pace stealthily round the little cage , lash its side with its tail , and rub its muzzle against the bar . " what be your order ? " ask of the carman . " it come through by special express from , sir , and the train be draw up at the siding all ready to take it back . if it ' ad be royalty the railway folk could n't ' show it more ' . we be to take it back when you be do with it . it have be a cruel job , sir , for our arm be pull clean out of the socket in of the ' . " " what a dear , sweet creature it be , " cry . " how sleek and how graceful ! i can understand how people could be afraid of anything so beautiful . " " if you please , , " say the carman , touch his skin cap , " he out with his paw between the bar as we stand in the station yard , and if i ' ad n't pull my mate bill back it would ' be a case of kingdom come . it be a proper near squeak , i can tell . " " i never see anything more lovely , " continue , loftily overlook the remark of the driver . " it have be a very great pleasure to me to see it , and i hope that you will tell so if you see him , . " " the horse be very restive , " say her brother . " perhaps , , if you have see enough , it would be as well to let them go . " she bow in the regal fashion which she have so suddenly adopt . shout the order , the driver spring up , his comrade let the horse go , and away rattle the waggon and the with half the stream vainly behind it . " be it not wonderful what money can do ? " remark , as they knock the snow from their shoe within the porch . " there seem to be no wish which could not at once gratify . " " no wish of yours , you mean , " break in her father . " it be different when he be deal with a wrinkle old man who have spend himself in work for his child . a plain case of love at first sight i never see . " " how can you be so coarse , papa ? " cry , but her eye flash , and her tooth gleam , as though the remark have not altogether displease her . " for heaven 's sake , be careful , ! " cry . " it have not strike me before , but really it do look rather like it . you know how you stand . raffle be not a man to play with . " " you dear old boy ! " say , lay her hand upon his shoulder , " what do you know of such thing ? all you have to do be to go on with your painting , and to remember the promise you make the other night . " " what promise be that , then ? " cry old suspiciously . " never you mind , papa . but if you forget it , , i shall never forgive you as long as i live . " it can easily be believe that as the week pass the name and fame of the mysterious owner of the resound over the quiet countryside until the rumour of him have spread to the remote corner of and . in on the one side , and in and on the other , there be gossip as to his untold rich , his extraordinary whim , and the remarkable life which he lead . his name be bandy from mouth to mouth , and a thousand effort be make to find out who and what he be . in spite of all their pain , however , the newsmonger be unable to discover the slight trace of his antecedent , or to form even a guess as to the secret of his rich . it be no wonder that conjecture be rife upon the subject , for hardly a day pass without furnish some new instance of the boundlessness of his power and of the goodness of his heart . through the vicar , , and other , he have learn much of the inner life of the parish , and many be the time when the struggle man , harass and drive to the wall , find thrust into his hand some morning a brief note with an enclosure which roll all the sorrow back from his life . one day a thick double-breasted pea-jacket and a pair of good sturdy boot be serve out to every old man in the almshouse . on another , , the decay gentlewoman who eke out her small annuity by needlework , have a brand new first-class sewing-machine hand in to her to take the place of the old worn-out treadle which try her rheumatic joint . the schoolmaster , who have spend year with hardly a break in struggle with the juvenile obtuseness of , receive through the post a circular ticket for a two month ' tour through , with hotel coupon and all complete . , the farmer , after five long year of bad season , bear with a brave heart , have at last be overthrow by the sixth , and have the bailiff actually in the house when the good vicar have rush in , wave a note above his head , to tell him not only that his deficit have be make up , but that enough remain over to provide the improve machinery which would enable him to hold his own for the future . an almost superstitious feeling come upon the rustic folk as they look at the great palace when the sun gleam upon the huge hot-house , or even more so , perhaps , when at night the brilliant electric light shoot their white radiance through the countless row of window . to them it be as if some minor preside in that great place , unseen but see all , boundless in its power and its graciousness , ever ready to assist and to befriend . in every good deed , however , still remain in the background , while the vicar and have the pleasant task of convey his benefit to the lowly and the suffering . once only do he appear in his own person , and that be upon the famous occasion when he save the well-known bank of in . the most charitable and upright of man , the two brother , and , have build up a business which extend its ramification into every of four county . the failure of their agent have suddenly bring a heavy loss upon them , and the circumstance leak out have cause a sudden and most dangerous run upon their establishment . urgent telegram for bullion from all their forty branch pour in at the very instant when the head office be crowd with anxious client all wave their , and clamour for their money . bravely do the two brother with their staff stand with smile face behind the shine counter , while swift messenger speed and telegram flash to draw in all the available resource of the bank . all day the stream pour through the office , and when four o'clock come , and the door be close for the day , the street without be still block by the expectant crowd , while there remain scarce a thousand pound of bullion in the cellar . " it be only postpone . , " say brother despairingly , when the last clerk have leave the office , and when at last they could relax the fix smile upon their haggard face . " those shutter will never come down again , " cry brother , and the two suddenly burst out sob in each other 's arm , not for their own grief , but for the misery which they might bring upon those who have trust them . but who shall ever dare to say that there be no hope , if he will but give his grief to the world ? that very night have receive a letter from her old school friend , , with all her fear and her hope pour out in it , and the whole sad story of their trouble . swift from the go the message to the , and early next morning , with a great black carpet-bag in his hand , find mean to draw the cashier of the local branch of the of from his breakfast , and to persuade him to open his door at unofficial hour . by nine the crowd have already begin to collect around 's , when a stranger , pale and thin , with a bloated carpet-bag , be show at his own very pressing request into the bank parlour . " it be no use , sir , " say the elder brother humbly , as they stand together encourage each other to turn a brave face to misfortune , " we can do no more . we have little leave , and it would be unfair to the other to pay you now . we can but hope that when our asset be realise no one will be the loser save ourselves . " " i do not come to draw out , but to put in , " say in his demure apologetic fashion . " i have in my bag five thousand of note . if you will have the goodness to place them to my credit account i should be extremely oblige . " " but , good heaven , sir ! " stammer , " have you not hear ? have you not see ? we can allow you to do this thing blindfold ; can we ? " " most certainly not . we can recommend our bank , sir , at the present moment , for there be a run upon us , and we do not know to what length it may go . " " tut ! tut ! " say . " if the run continue you must send me a wire , and i shall make a small addition to my account . you will send me a receipt by post . , gentleman ! " he bow himself out ere the astound partner could realise what have befall them , or raise their eye from the huge black bag and the visit card which lie upon their table . there be no great failure in that day , and the house of still survive to enjoy the success which it deserve . such be the deed by which make himself know throughout the , and yet , in spite of all his , he be not a man to be impose upon . in vain the sturdy beggar cringe at his gate , and in vain the crafty pour out a thousand fabulous woe upon paper . be astonish when he bring some tale of trouble to the to observe how swift be the perception of the recluse , and how unerringly he could detect a flaw in a narrative , or lie his finger upon the one point which ring false . be a man strong enough to help himself , or of such a nature as to profit nothing by help , none would he get from the master of the . in vain , for example , do old throw himself continually across the path of the millionaire , and impress upon him , by a thousand hint and innuendoe , the hard fortune which have be deal him , and the ease with which his fall greatness might be restore . raffle listen politely , bow , smile , but never show the slight inclination to restore the querulous old to his pedestal . but if the recluse 's wealth be a lure which draw the beggar from far and near , as the lamp draw the moth , it have the same power of attraction upon another and much more dangerous class . strange hard face be see in the village street , prowl figure be mark at night steal about among the fir plantation , and warning message arrive from city police and county constabulary to say that evil visitor be know to have take train to . but if , as hold , there be few limit to the power of immense wealth , it possess , among other thing , the power of self-preservation , as one or two people be to learn to their cost . " would you mind step up to the ? " he say one morning , put his head in at the door of the sitting-room . " i have something there that might amuse you . " he be on intimate term with the now , and there be few day on which they do not see something of each other . they gladly accompany him , all three , for such invitation be usually the prelude of some agreeable surprise which he have in store for them . " i have show you a tiger , " he remark to , as he lead them into the dining-room . " i will now show you something quite as dangerous , though not nearly so pretty . " there be an arrangement of mirror at one end of the room , with a large circular glass set at a sharp angle at the top . " look in the upper glass , " say . " good gracious ! what man ! " cry . " there be two of them , and i do n't know which be the bad . " " what on earth be they do ? " ask . " they appear to be sit on the ground in some sort of a cellar . " " most character , " say the old man . " i should strongly recommend you to send for a policeman . " " i have do so . but it seem a work of supererogation to take them to prison , for they be very snugly in prison already . however , i suppose that the law must have its own . " " and who be they , and how do they come there ? do tell us , . " have a pretty beseeching way with her , which go rather piquantly with her queenly style of beauty . " i know no more than you do . they be not there last night , and they be here this morning , so i suppose it be a safe inference that they come in during the night , especially as my servant find the window open when they come down . as to their character and intention , i should think that be pretty legible upon their face . they look a pair of beauty , do n't they ? " " but i can understand in the least where they be , " say , stare into the mirror . " one of them have take to butt his head against the wall . no , he be bend so that the other may stand upon his back . he be up there now , and the light be shine upon his face . what a bewilder ruffianly face it be too . i should so like to sketch it . it would be a study for the picture i be think of of the of . " " i have catch them in my patent burglar trap , " say . " they be my first bird , but i have no doubt that they will not be the last . i will show you how it work . it be quite a new thing . this flooring be now as strong as possible , but every night i disconnect it . it be do simultaneously by a central machine for every room on the ground-floor . when the floor be disconnect one may advance three or four step , either from the window or door , and then that whole part turn on a hinge and slide you into a pad strong-room beneath , where you may kick your heel until you be release . there be a central oasis between the hinge , where the furniture be group for the night . the flooring fly into position again when the weight of the intruder be remove , and there he must bide , while i can always take a peep at him by this simple little optical arrangement . i think it might amuse you to have a look at my prisoner before i hand them over to the , who i see be now come up the avenue . " " the poor burglar ! " cry . " it be no wonder that they look bewilder , for i suppose , , that they neither know where they be , nor how they come there . i be so glad to know that you guard yourself in this way , for i have often think that you run a danger . " " have you so ? " say he , smile round at her . " i think that my house be fairly burglar-proof . i have one window which may be use as an entrance , the centre one of the three of my laboratory . i keep it so because , to tell the truth , i be somewhat of a night prowler myself , and when i treat myself to a ramble under the star i like to slip in and out without ceremony . it would , however , be a fortunate rogue who pick the only safe entrance out of a hundred , and even then he might find pitfall . here be the constable , but you must not go , for have still something to see in my little place . if you will step into the billiard-room i shall be with you in a very few moment . " that morning , and many morning both before and afterwards , be spend by at the examine the treasure of the museum , play with the thousand costly toy which have collect , or sally out from the smoking-room in the crystal chamber into the long line of luxurious hot-house . would walk demurely beside her as she flit from one thing to another like a butterfly among flower , watch her out of the corner of his eye , and take a quiet pleasure in her delight . the only joy which his costly possession have ever bring him be that which come from the entertainment of other . by this time his attention towards have become so mark that they could hardly be mistake . he visibly brighten in her presence , and be never weary of devise a thousand method of surprise and please her . every morning ere the family be afoot a great bouquet of strange and beautiful flower be bring down by a footman from the to brighten their . her slight wish , however fantastic , be instantly satisfy , if human money or ingenuity could do it . when the frost last a stream be dam and turn from its course that it might flood two meadow , solely in order that she might have a place upon which to skate . with the thaw there come a groom every afternoon with a sleek and beautiful mare in case should care to ride . everything go to show that she have make a conquest of the recluse of the . and she on her side play her part admirably . with female she fall in with his humour , and look at the world through his eye . her talk be of almshouse and free library , of charity and of improvement . he have never a scheme to which she could not add some detail make it more complete and more effective . to it seem that at last he have meet a mind which be in absolute affinity with his own . here be a , who could not only follow , but even lead him in the path which he have choose . neither nor his father could fail to see what be go forward , but to the latter nothing could possibly be more acceptable than a family tie which should connect him , however indirectly , with a man of vast fortune . the glamour of the gold bag have creep over also , and freeze the remonstrance upon his lip . it be very pleasant to have the handling of all this wealth , even as a mere agent . why should he do or say what might disturb their present happy relation ? it be his sister 's business , not his ; and as to , he must take his chance as other man do . it be obviously well not to move one way or the other in the matter . but to himself , his work and his surroundings be become more and more irksome . his joy in his art have become less keen since he have know . it seem so hard to toll and slave to earn such a trifling sum , when money could really be have for the asking . it be true that he have ask for none , but large sum be for ever pass through his hand for those who be needy , and if he be needy himself his friend would surely not grudge it to him . so the galley still remain faintly outline upon the great canvas , while 's day be spend either in the luxurious library at the , or in stroll about the country listen to tale of trouble , and return like a minister angel to carry 's help to the unfortunate . it be not an ambitious life , but it be one which be very congenial to his weak and easy-going nature . have observe that fit of depression have frequently come upon the millionaire , and it have sometimes strike him that the enormous sum which he spend have possibly make a serious inroad into his capital , and that his mind be trouble as to the future . his abstracted manner , his clouded brow , and his bent head all speak of a soul which be weigh down with care , and it be only in 's presence that he could throw off the load of his secret trouble . for five hour a day he bury himself in the laboratory and amuse himself with his hobby , but it be one of his whim that no one , neither any of his servant , nor even or , should ever cross the threshold of that outlying building . day after day he vanish into it , to reappear hour afterwards pale and exhaust , while the whirr of machinery and the smoke which stream from his high chimney show how considerable be the operation which he undertake single-handed . " could i not assist you in any way ? " suggest , as they sit together after luncheon in the smoking-room . " i be convince that you your strength . i should be so glad to help you , and i know a little of chemistry . " " do you , indeed ? " say , raise his eyebrow . " i have no idea of that ; it be very seldom that the artistic and the scientific faculty go together . " " i do n't know that i have either particularly develop . but i have take class , and i work for two year in the laboratory at 's . " " i be delight to hear it , " reply with emphasis . " that may be of great importance to us . it be very , almost i shall avail myself of your offer of assistance , and teach you something of my chemical method , which i may say differ considerably from those of the orthodox school . the time , however , be hardly ripe for that . what be it , ? " " a note , sir . " the butler hand it in upon a silver salver . break the seal and run his eye over it . " tut ! tut ! it be from , ask me to the 's ball . i can possibly accept . it be very kind of them , but i do wish they would leave me alone . very well , . i shall write . do you know , , i be often very unhappy . " he frequently call the young artist by his christian name , especially in his more confidential moment . " i have sometimes fear that you be , " say the other sympathetically . " but how strange it seem , you who be yet young , healthy , with every faculty for enjoyment , and a millionaire . " " ah , , " cry , lean back in his chair , and send up thick blue wreath from his pipe . " you have put your finger upon my trouble . if i be a millionaire i might be happy , but , alas , i be no millionaire ! " " good heaven ! " gasp . seem to shoot to his inmost soul as it flash upon him that this be a prelude to a confession of impending bankruptcy , and that all this glorious life , all the excitement and the colour and change , be about to vanish into thin air . " no millionaire ! " he stammer . " no , ; i be a the only one in the world . that be what be on my mind , and why i be unhappy sometimes . i feel that i should spend this i should put it in yet it be so hard to do it without fail to do do positive harm . i feel my responsibility deeply . it weigh me down . be i justify in continue to live this quiet life when there be so many million whom i might save and comfort if i could but reach them ? " heave a long sigh of relief . " perhaps you take too grave a view of your responsibility , " he say . " everybody know that the good which you have do be immense . what more could you desire ? if you really wish to extend your benevolence further , there be organise charity everywhere which would be very glad of your help . " " i have the name of two hundred and seventy of them , " answer . " you must run your eye over them some time , and see if you can suggest any other . i send my annual mite to each of them . i do n't think there be much room for expansion in that direction . " " well , really you have do your share , and more than your share . i would settle down to lead a happy life , and think no more of the matter . " " i could not do that , " answer earnestly . " i have not be single out to wield this immense power simply in order that i might lead a happy life . i can never believe that . now , can you not use your imagination , , and devise method by which a man who have command , let us say , for argument 's sake , boundless wealth , could benefit mankind by it , without take away any one 's independence or in any way do harm ? " " well , really , now that i come to think of it , it be a very difficult problem , " say . " now i will submit a few scheme to you , and you may give me your opinion on them . suppose that such a man be to buy ten square mile of ground here in , and be to build upon it a neat city , consist entirely of clean , comfortable little house , furnish in a simple style , with shop and so forth , but no . suppose , too , that he be to offer a house free to all the homeless folk , all the tramp , and break man , and in . then , have collect them together , let him employ them , under fitting superintendence , upon some colossal piece of work which would last for many year , and perhaps be of permanent value to humanity . give them a good rate of pay , and let their hour of labour be reasonable , and those of recreation be pleasant . might you not benefit them and benefit humanity at one stroke ? " " but what form of work could you devise which would employ so vast a number for so long a time , and yet not compete with any existing industry ? to do the latter would simply mean to shift the misery from one class to another . " " precisely so . i should compete with no one . what i think of do be of sink a shaft through the earth 's crust , and of establish rapid communication with the . when you have get a certain distance far be an interesting mathematical centre of gravity would be beneath you , presume that your boring be not quite direct towards the centre , and you could then lay down rail and tunnel as if you be on the level . " then for the first time it flash into 's head that his father 's chance word be correct , and that he be in the presence of a madman . his great wealth have clearly turn his brain , and make him a monomaniac . he nod indulgently , as when one humour a child . " it would be very nice , " he say . " i have hear , however , that the interior of the earth be melt , and your workman would need to be . " " the late scientific datum do not bear out the idea that the earth be so hot , " answer . " it be certain that the increase temperature in coal mine depend upon the barometric pressure . there be gas in the earth which may be ignite , and there be combustible material as we see in the volcano ; but if we come across anything of the sort in our boring , we could turn a river or two down the shaft , and get the good of it in that fashion . " " it would be rather awkward if the other end of your shaft come out under the , " say , choke down his inclination to laugh . " i have have estimate and calculation from the first living , , and . the point of exit of the tunnel could be calculate to the yard . that portfolio in the corner be full of section , plan , and diagram . i have agent employ in buy up land , and if all go well , we may get to work in the autumn . that be one device which may produce result . another be . " " ah , there you would compete with the railway . " " you do n't quite understand . i intend to cut canal through every neck of land where such a convenience would facilitate commerce . such a scheme , when unaccompanied by any toll upon vessel , would , i think , be a very judicious way of help the human race . " " and where , pray , would you cut the canal ? " ask . " i have a map of the world here , " answer , rise , and take one down from the . " you see the blue pencil mark . those be the point where i propose to establish communication . of course , i should begin by the obvious duty of finish the business . " " naturally . " the man 's lunacy be become more and more obvious , and yet there be such precision and coolness in his manner , that find himself against his own reason endorse and speculate over his plan . " the of also occur to one . that , however , be a small matter , from either a financial or an engineering point of view . i propose , however , to make a junction here , through between the german and the . it save , you will observe , the whole journey round the coast of , and would facilitate our trade with and . another very obvious improvement be to join the and the , so as to connect with the irish and american route . you see the blue line ? " " quite so . " " and we will have a little cutting here . it will run from to , and will connect the with the of . we must not allow our sympathy to be insular , must we ? our little charity should be cosmopolitan . we will try and give the good people of a good outlet for their fur and their tallow . " " but it will freeze . " " for six month in the year . still , it will be something . then we must do something for the . it would never do to overlook the . " " it would certainly be an oversight , " say , who be keenly alive to the comical side of the question . raffle , however , in deadly earnest , sit scratch away at his map with his blue pencil . " here be a point where we might be of some little use . if we cut through from to the we might tap the trade of the , and open up communication with all the river which run into it . you notice that they include a considerable tract of country . then , again , i think that we might venture upon a little cutting between , on the , and the upper water of the , which would lead us into the . those be one or two of the more obvious canal which might knit the human race into a closer whole . " " your plan be certainly stupendous , " say , uncertain whether to laugh or to be awe-struck . " you will cease to be a man , and become one of the great force of , alter , mould , and improve . " " that be precisely the view which i take of myself . that be why i feel my responsibility so acutely . " " but surely if you will do all this you may rest . it be a considerable programme . " " not at all . i be a patriotic briton , and i should like to do something to leave my name in the annals of my country . i should prefer , however , to do it after my own death , as anything in the shape of publicity and honour be very offensive to me . i have , therefore , put by eight hundred million in a place which shall be duly mention in my will , which i propose to devote to pay off the . i can see that any harm could arise from its extinction . " sit stare , strike dumb by the audacity of the strange man 's word . " then there be the heating of the soil . there be room for improvement there . you have no doubt read of the immense yield which have result in and elsewhere , from the running of hot-water pipe through the soil . the crop be treble and quadruple . i would propose to try the experiment upon a large scale . we might possibly reserve the of to serve as a pump and heat station . the main pipe would run to , , and , where they would subdivide rapidly until they form a network two foot deep under the whole country . a pipe at distance of a yard would suffice for every purpose . " " i be afraid , " suggest , " that the water which leave the of warm might lose a little of its virtue before it reach , for example . " " there need not be any difficulty there . every few mile a furnace might be arrange to keep up the temperature . these be a few of my plan for the future , , and i shall want the co-operation of disinterested man like yourself in all of them . but how brightly the sun shine , and how sweet the countryside look ! the world be very beautiful , and i should like to leave it happy than i find it . let us walk out together , , and you will tell me of any fresh case where i may be of assistance . " whatever good 's wealth do to the world , there could be no doubt that there be case where it do harm . the very contemplation and think of it have upon many a disturbing and mischievous effect . especially be this the case with the old . from be merely a querulous and grasping man , he have now become bitter , brood , and dangerous . week by week , as he see the tide of wealth flow as it be through his very house without be able to divert the small rill to nourish his own fortune , he become more wolfish and more . he speak less of his own wrong , but he brood more , and would stand for hour on look down at the great palace beneath , as a man might gaze at the desert mirage . he have work , and peep , and pry , too , until there be point upon which he know more than either his son or his daughter . " i suppose that you still do n't know where your friend get his money ? " he remark to one morning , as they walk together through the village . " no , father , i do not . i only know that he spend it very well . " " well ! " snarl the old man . " yes , very well ! he have help every tramp and slut and worthless vagabond over the countryside , but he will not advance a pound , even on the good security , to help a respectable business man to fight against misfortune . " " my dear father , i really can argue with you about it , " say . " i have already tell you more than once what i think . 's object be to help those who be destitute . he look upon us as his equal , and would not presume to patronise us , or to act as if we could not help ourselves . it would be a humiliation to us to take his money . " " ! besides , it be only a question of an advance , and advance be make every day among business man . how can you talk such nonsense , ? " early as it be , his son could see from his excited , quarrelsome manner that the old man have be drink . the habit have grow upon him of late , and it be seldom now that he be entirely sober . " be the good judge , " say coldly . " if he earn the money , he have a right to spend it as he like . " " and how do he earn it ? you do n't know , . you do n't know that you be n't aid and abet a felony when you help him to fritter it away . be ever so much money earn in an honest fashion ? i tell you there never be . i tell you , also , that lump of gold be no more to that man than chunk of coal to the miner over yonder . he could build his house of them and think nothing of it . " " i know that he be very rich , father . i think , however , that he have an extravagant way of talk sometimes , and that his imagination carry him away . i have hear him talk of plan which the rich man upon earth could not possibly hope to carry through . " " do n't you make any mistake , my son . your poor old father be n't quite a fool , though he be only an honest break merchant . " he look up sideways at his son with a wink and a most unpleasant leer . " where there be money i can smell it . there be money there , and heap of it . it be my belief that he be the rich man in the world , though how he come to be so i should not like to guarantee . i be not quite blind yet , . have you see the weekly waggon ? " " the weekly waggon ! " " yes , . you see i can find some news for you yet . it be due this morning . every morning you will see the waggon come in . why , here it be now , as i be a live man , come round the curve . " glance back and see a great heavy waggon draw by two strong horse lumber slowly along the road which lead to the . from the effort of the animal and its slow pace the content seem to be of great weight . " just you wait here , " old cry , pluck at his son 's sleeve with his thin bony hand . " wait here and see it pass . then we will watch what become of it . " they stand by the side of the road until it come abreast of them . the waggon be cover with tarpaulin sheeting in front and at the side , but behind some glimpse could be catch of the content . they consist , as far as could see , of a number of packet of the same shape , each about two foot long and six inch high , arrange symmetrically upon the top of each other . each packet be surround by a covering of coarse sacking . " what do you think of that ? " ask old triumphantly as the load creak past . " why , father ? what do you make of it ? " " i have watch it , have watch it every , and i have my chance of look a little deep into it . you remember the day when the elm blow down , and the road be block until they could saw it in two . that be on a , and the waggon come to a stand until they could clear a way for it . i be there , , and i see my chance . i stroll behind the waggon , and i place my hand upon one of those packet . they look small , do they not ? it would take a strong man to lift one . they be heavy , , heavy , and hard with the hardness of metal . i tell you , boy , that that waggon be load with gold . " " gold ! " " with solid bar of gold , . but come into the plantation and we shall see what become of it . " they pass through the lodge gate , behind the waggon , and then wander off among the until they gain a spot where they could command a view . the load have halt , not in front of the house , but at the door of the with the chimney . a staff of and footman be in readiness , who proceed to swiftly unload and to carry the package through the door . it be the first time that have ever see any one save the master of the house enter the laboratory . no sign be see of him now , however , and in half an hour the content have all be safely store and the waggon have drive briskly away . " i can understand it , father , " say thoughtfully , as they resume their walk . " suppose that your supposition be correct , who would send him such quantity of gold , and where could it come from ? " " , you have to come to the old man after all ! " chuckle his companion . " i can see the little game . it be clear enough to me . there be two of them in it , you understand . the other one get the gold . never mind how , but we will hope that there be no harm . let us suppose , for example , that they have find a marvellous mine , where you can just shovel it out like clay from a pit . well , then , he send it on to this one , and he have his furnace and his chemical , and he refine and purify it and make it fit to sell . that be my explanation of it , . , have the old man put his finger on it ? " " but if that be true , father , the gold must go back again . " " so it do , , but a little at a time . , ! i have have my eye open , you see . every night it go down in a small cart , and be send on to by the @card@ . not in bar this time , but do up in chest . i have see them , boy , and i have have this hand upon them . " " well , " say the young man thoughtfully , " maybe you be right . it be possible that you be right . " while father and son be pry into his secret , have find his way to , where sit read the by the fire . " i be so sorry , " she say , throw down her paper and spring to her foot . " they be all out except me . but i be sure that they wo n't be long . i expect every moment . " " i would rather speak with you alone , " answer quietly . " pray sit down , for i want to have a little chat with you . " resume her seat with a flush upon her cheek and a quicken of the breath . she turn her face away and gaze into the fire ; but there be a sparkle in her eye which be not catch from the leap flame . " do you remember the first time that we meet , ? " he ask , stand on the rug and look down at her dark hair , and the beautifully feminine curve of her ivory neck . " as if it be yesterday , " she answer in her sweet mellow tone . " then you must also remember the wild word that i say when we part . it be very foolish of me . i be sure that i be most sorry if i frighten or disturb you , but i have be a very solitary man for a long time , and i have drop into a bad habit of think aloud . your voice , your face , your manner , be all so like my ideal of a true woman , loving , faithful , and sympathetic , that i could not help wonder whether , if i be a poor man , i might ever hope to win the affection of such a one . " " your good opinion , , be very dear to me , " say . " i assure you that i be not frighten , and that there be no need to apologise for what be really a compliment . " " since then i have find , " he continue , " that all that i have read upon your face be true . that your mind be indeed that of the true woman , full of the noble and sweet quality which human nature can aspire to . you know that i be a man of fortune , but i wish you to dismiss that consideration from your mind . do you think from what you know of my character that you could be happy as my wife , ? " she make no answer , but still sit with her head turn away and her sparkling eye fix upon the fire . one little foot from under her skirt tap nervously upon the rug . " it be only right that you should know a little more about me before you decide . there be , however , little to know . i be an orphan , and , as far as i know , without a relation upon earth . my father be a respectable man , a country surgeon in , and he bring me up to his own profession . before i have pass my examination , however , he die and leave me a small annuity . i have conceive a great liking for the subject of chemistry and electricity , and instead of go on with my medical work i devote myself entirely to these study , and eventually build myself a laboratory where i could follow out my own research . at about this time i come into a very large sum of money , so large as to make me feel that a vast responsibility rest upon me in the use which i make of it . after some thought i determine to build a large house in a quiet part of the country , not too far from a great centre . there i could be in touch with the world , and yet would have quiet and leisure to mature the scheme which be in my head . as it chance , i choose as my site . all that remain now be to carry out the plan which i have make , and to endeavour to lighten the earth of some of the misery and injustice which weigh it down . i again ask you , , will you throw in your lot with mine , and help me in the life 's work which lie before me ? " look up at him , at his stringy figure , his pale face , his keen , yet gentle eye . somehow as she look there seem to form itself beside him some shadow of , the manly feature , the clear , firm mouth , the frank manner . now , in the very moment of her triumph , it spring clearly up in her mind how at the hour of their ruin he have stand firmly by them , and have love the penniless girl as tenderly as the heiress to fortune . that last embrace at the door , too , come back to her , and she feel his lip warm upon her own . " i be very much honour , , " she stammer , " but this be so sudden . i have not have time to think . i do not know what to say . " " do not let me hurry you , " he cry earnestly . " i beg that you will think well over it . i shall come again for my answer . when shall i come ? tonight ? " " yes , come tonight . " " then , adieu . believe me that i think more highly of you for your hesitation . i shall live in hope . " he raise her hand to his lip , and leave her to her own thought . but what those thought be do not long remain in doubt . dim and dim grow the vision of the distant sailor face , clear and clear the image of the vast palace , of the queenly power , of the diamond , the gold , the ambitious future . it all lie at her foot , wait to be pick up . how could she have hesitate , even for a moment ? she rise , and , walk over to her desk , she take out a sheet of paper and an envelope . the latter she address to , , . the note cost some little trouble , but at last she get it word to her mind . " , " she be convince that your father have never entirely approve of our engagement , otherwise he would not have throw obstacle in the way of our marriage . i be sure , too , that since my poor father 's misfortune it be only your own sense of honour and feeling of duty which have keep you true to me , and that you would have do infinitely good have you never see me . i can bear , , to allow you to imperil your future for my sake , and i have determine , after think well over the matter , to release you from our boy and girl engagement , so that you may be entirely free in every way . it be possible that you may think it unkind of me to do this now , but i be quite sure , dear , that when you be an admiral and a very distinguished man , you will look back at this , and you will see that i have be a true friend to you , and have prevent you from make a false step early in your career . for myself , whether i marry or not , i have determine to devote the remainder of my life to try to do good , and to leave the world happy than i find it . your father be very well , and give us a capital sermon last . i enclose the bank-note which you ask me to keep for you . good-bye , for ever , dear , and believe me when i say that , come what may , i be ever your true friend , " . " she have hardly seal her letter before her father and return . she close the door behind them , and make them a little curtsey . " i await my family 's congratulation , " she say , with her head in the air . " have be here , and he have ask me to be his wife . " " the deuce he do ! " cry the old man . " and you -- ? " " i be to see him again . " " and you will -- ? " " i will accept him . " " you be always a good girl , , " say old , standing on his tiptoe to kiss her . " but , , how about ? " ask in mild remonstrance . " oh , i have write to him , " his sister answer carelessly . " i wish you would be good enough to post the letter . " and so become duly engage to , and old grow even more as he feel himself a step near to the source of wealth , while think less of work than ever , and never give as much as a thought to the great canvas which still stand , , upon his easel . give an engagement ring of old gold , with a great blaze diamond bulge out of it . there be little talk about the matter , however , for it be 's wish that all should be do very quietly . nearly all his evening be spend at , where he and would build up the most colossal scheme of philanthropy for the future . with a map stretch out on the table in front of them , these two young people would , as it be , hover over the world , planning , devise , and improve . " bless the girl ! " say old to his son ; " she speak about it as if she be bear to million . maybe , when once she be married , she wo n't be so ready to chuck her money into every mad scheme that her husband can think of . " " be greatly change , " answer ; " she have grow much more serious in her idea . " " you wait a bit ! " snigger his father . " she be a good girl , be , and she know what she be about . she be not a girl to let her old dad go to the wall if she can set him right . it be a pretty state of thing , " he add bitterly : " here be my daughter go to marry a man who think no more of gold than i use to of gun-metal ; and here be my son go about with all the money he care to ask for to help every ne'er-do-well in ; and here be their father , who love them and care for them , and bring them both up , without money enough very often to buy a bottle of brandy . i do n't know what your poor dear mother would have think of it . " " you have only to ask for what you want . " " yes , as if i be a five-year-old child . but i tell you , , i will have my right , and if i ca n't get them one way i will another . i wo n't be treat as if i be no one . and there be one thing : if i be to be this man 's , i will want to know something about him and his money first . we may be poor , but we be honest . i will up to the now , and have it out with him . " he seize his hat and stick and make for the door . " no , no , father , " cry , catch him by the sleeve . " you have well leave the matter alone . be a very sensitive man . he would not like to be examine upon such a point . it might lead to a serious quarrel . i beg that you will not go . " " i be not to be put off for ever , " snarl the old man , who have be drink heavily . " i will put my foot down now , once and for ever . " he tug at his sleeve to free himself from his son 's grasp . " at least you shall not go without know . i will call her down , and we shall have her opinion . " " oh , i do n't want to have any scene , " say sulkily , relax his effort . he live in dread of his daughter , and at his bad moment the mention of her name would serve to restrain him . " besides , " say , " i have not the slight doubt that will see the necessity for give us some sort of explanation before matter go further . he must understand that we have some claim now to be take into his confidence . " he have hardly speak when there be a tap at the door , and the man of whom they be speak walk in . " , , " say he . " , would you mind step up to the with me ? i want to have a little business chat . " he look serious , like a man who be carry out something which he have well weigh . they walk up together with hardly a word on either side . raffle be absorb in his own thought . feel expectant and nervous , for he know that something of importance lie before him . the winter have almost pass now , and the first young shoot be begin to peep out timidly in the face of the wind and the rain of an . the snow be go , but the countryside look bleak and dreary , all shroud in the haze from the damp , sodden meadow . " by the way , , " say suddenly , as they walk up the . " have your great picture go to ? " " i have not finish it yet . " " but i know that you be a quick worker . you must be nearly at the end of it . " " no , i be afraid that it have not advance much since you see it . for one thing , the light have not be very good . " raffle say nothing , but a pained expression flash over his face . when they reach the house he lead the way through the museum . two great metal case be lie on the floor . " i have a small addition there to the gem collection , " he remark as he pass . " they only arrive last night , and i have not open them yet , but i be give to understand from the letter and invoice that there be some fine specimen . we might arrange them this afternoon , if you care to assist me . let us go into the smoking-room now . " he throw himself down into a settee , and motion into the armchair in front of him . " light a cigar , " he say . " press the spring if there be any refreshment which you would like . now , my dear , confess to me in the first place that you have often think me mad . " the charge be so direct and so true that the young artist hesitate , hardly know how to answer . " my dear boy , i do not blame you . it be the most natural thing in the world . i should have look upon anyone as a madman who have talk to me as i have talk to you . but for all that , , you be wrong , and i have never yet in our conversation propose any scheme which it be not well within my power to carry out . i tell you in all sober earnest that the amount of my income be limit only by my desire , and that all the banker and financier combine could not furnish the sum which i can put forward without an effort . " " i have have ample proof of your immense wealth , " say . " and you be very naturally curious as to how that wealth be obtain . well , i can tell you one thing . the money be perfectly clean . i have rob no one , cheat no one , sweat no one , grind no one down in the gain of it . i can read your father 's eye , . i can see that he have do me an injustice in this matter . well , perhaps he be not to be blame . perhaps i also might think uncharitable thing if i be in his place . but that be why i now give an explanation to you , , and not to him . you , at least , have trust me , and you have a right , before i become one of your family , to know all that i can tell you . also have trust me , but i know well that she be content still to trust me . " " i would not intrude upon your secret , , " say , " but of course i can deny that i should be very proud and pleased if you care to confide them to me . " " and i will . not all . i do not think that i shall ever , while i live , tell all . but i shall leave direction behind me so that when i die you may be able to carry on my unfinished work . i shall tell you where those direction be to be find . in the meantime , you must be content to learn the effect which i produce without know every detail as to the mean . " settle himself down in his chair and concentrate his attention upon his companion 's word , while bend forward his eager , earnest face , like a man who know the value of the word which he be say . " you be already aware , " he remark , " that i have devote a great deal of energy and of time to the study of chemistry . " " so you tell me . " " i commence my study under a famous english chemist , i continue them under the good man in , and i complete them in the most celebrated laboratory of . i be not rich , but my father have leave me enough to keep me comfortably , and by live economically i have a sum at my command which enable me to carry out my study in a very complete way . when i return to i build myself a laboratory in a quiet country place where i could work without distraction or interruption . there i begin a series of investigation which soon take me into region of science to which none of the three famous man who teach me have ever penetrate . " you say , , that you have some slight knowledge of chemistry , and you will find it easy to follow what i say . chemistry be to a large extent an empirical science , and the chance experiment may lead to great result than could , with our present datum , be derive from the close study or the keen reasoning . the most important chemical discovery from the first manufacture of glass to the whitening and refining of sugar have all be due to some happy chance which might have befall a mere dabbler as easily as a deep student . " well , it be to such a chance that my own great the great that the world have due , though i may claim the credit of have originate the line of thought which lead up to it . i have frequently speculate as to the effect which powerful current of electricity exercise upon any substance through which they be pour for a considerable time . i do not here mean such feeble current as be pass along a telegraph wire , but i mean the very high possible development . well , i try a series of experiment upon this point . i find that in liquid , and in compound , the force have a disintegrate effect . the well-known experiment of the electrolysis of water will , of course , occur to you . but i find that in the case of elemental solid the effect be a remarkable one . the element slowly decrease in weight , without perceptibly alter in composition . i hope that i make myself clear to you ? " " i follow you entirely , " say , deeply interested in his companion 's narrative . " i try upon several element , and always with the same result . in every case an hour 's current would produce a perceptible loss of weight . my theory at that stage be that there be a loosening of the molecule cause by the electric fluid , and that a certain number of these molecule be shed off like an impalpable dust , all round the lump of earth or of metal , which remain , of course , the lighter by their loss . i have entirely accept this theory , when a very remarkable chance lead me to completely alter my opinion . " i have one night fasten a bar of bismuth in a clamp , and have attach it on either side to an electric wire , in order to observe what effect the current would have upon it . i have be test each metal in turn , expose them to the influence for from one to two hour . i have just get everything in position , and have complete my connection , when i receive a telegram to say that , an old chemist in with whom i have be on term of intimacy , be dangerously ill , and have express a wish to see me . the last train be due to leave in twenty minute , and i live a good mile from the station , i thrust a few thing into a bag , lock my laboratory , and run as hard as i could to catch it . " it be not until i be in that it suddenly occur to me that i have neglect to shut off the current , and that it would continue to pass through the bar of bismuth until the battery be exhaust . the fact , however , seem to be of small importance , and i dismiss it from my mind . i be detain in until the night , and it be morning before i get back to my work . as i unlock the laboratory door my mind revert to the uncompleted experiment , and it strike me that in all probability my piece of bismuth would have be entirely disintegrate and reduce to its primitive molecule . i be utterly unprepared for the truth . " when i approach the table i find , sure enough , that the bar of metal have vanish , and that the clamp be empty . have note the fact , i be about to turn away to something else , when my attention be attract to the fact that the table upon which the clamp stand be star over with little patch of some liquid silvery matter , which lie in single drop or coalesce into little pool . i have a very distinct recollection of have thoroughly clear the table before begin my experiment , so that this substance have be deposit there since i have leave for . much interested , i very carefully collect it all into one vessel , and examine it minutely . there could be no question as to what it be . it be the pure mercury , and give no response to any test for bismuth . " i at once grasp the fact that chance have place in my hand a chemical discovery of the very first importance . if bismuth be , under certain condition , to be subject to the action of electricity , it would begin by lose weight , and would finally be transform into mercury . i have break down the partition which separate two element . " but the process would be a constant one . it would presumably prove to be a general law , and not an isolated fact . if bismuth turn into mercury , what would mercury turn into ? there would be no rest for me until i have solve the question . i renew the exhaust battery and pass the current through the bowl of quicksilver . for sixteen hour i sit watch the metal , mark how it slowly seem to curdle , to grow firm , to lose its silvery glitter and to take a dull yellow hue . when i at last pick it up in a forceps , and throw it upon the table , it have lose every characteristic of mercury , and have obviously become another metal . a few simple test be enough to show me that this other metal be platinum . " now , to a chemist , there be something very suggestive in the order in which these change have be effect . perhaps you can see the relation , , which they bear to each other ? " " no , i can say that i do . " have sit listen to this strange statement with parted lip and stare eye . " i will show you . speak atomically , bismuth be the heavy of the metal . its atomic weight be @card@ . the next in weight be lead , @card@ , and then come mercury at @card@ . possibly the long period during which the current have act in my absence have reduce the bismuth to lead and the lead in turn to mercury . now platinum stand at @card@ , and it be accordingly the next metal to be produce by the continued current . do you see now ? " " it be quite clear . " " and then there come the inference , which send my heart into my mouth and cause my head to swim round . be the next in the series . its atomic weight be @card@ . i remember now , and for the first time understand why it be always lead and mercury winch be mention by the old alchemist as be the two metal which might be use in their calling . with finger which tremble with excitement i adjust the wire again , and in little more than an the length of the process be always in proportion to the difference in the have before me a knob of ruddy crinkle metal , which answer to every reaction for gold . " well , , this be a long story , but i think that you will agree with me that its importance justify me in go into detail . when i have satisfy myself that i have really manufacture gold i cut the nugget in two . one half i send to a jeweller and worker in precious metal , with whom i have some slight acquaintance , ask him to report upon the quality of the metal . with the other half i continue my series of experiment , and reduce it in successive stage through all the long series of metal , through silver and zinc and manganese , until i bring it to lithium , which be the light of all . " " and what do it turn to then ? " ask . " then come what to chemist be likely to be the most interesting portion of my discovery . it turn to a greyish fine powder , which powder give no further result , however much i might treat it with electricity . and that powder be the base of all thing ; it be the mother of all the element ; it be , in short , the substance whose existence have be recently surmise by a lead chemist , and which have be christen protyle by him . i be the discoverer of the great law of the electrical transposition of the metal , and i be the first to demonstrate protyle , so that , i think , , if all my scheme in other direction come to nothing , my name be at least likely to live in the chemical world . " there be not very much more for me to tell you . i have my nugget back from my friend the jeweller , confirm my opinion as to its nature and its quality . i soon find several method by which the process might be simplify , and especially a modification of the ordinary electric current , which be very much more effective . have make a certain amount of gold , i dispose of it for a sum which enable me to buy improve material and strong battery . in this way i enlarge my operation until at last i be in a position to build this house and to have a laboratory where i could carry out my work on a much large scale . as i say before , i can now state with all truth that the amount of my income be only limited by my desire . " " it be wonderful ! " gasp . " it be like a fairy tale . but with this great discovery in your mind you must have be sorely tempt to confide it to other . " " i think well over it . i give it every consideration . it be obvious to me that if my invention be make public , its immediate result would be to deprive the present precious metal of all their special value . some other , we will say , or be choose as a medium for barter , and gold would be inferior to brass , as be heavy and yet not so hard . no one would be the good for such a consummation as that . now , if i retain my secret , and use it with wisdom , i might make myself the great benefactor to mankind that have ever live . those be the chief reason , and i trust that they be not dishonourable one , which lead me to form the resolution , which i have today for the first time break . " " but your secret be safe with me , " cry . " my lip shall be seal until i have your permission to speak . " " if i have not know that i could trust you i should have withhold it from your knowledge . and now , my dear , theory be very weak work , and practice be infinitely more interesting . i have give you more than enough of the first . if you will be good enough to accompany me to the laboratory i shall give you a little of the latter . " raffle lead the way through the front door , and cross over the gravel drive push open the outer door of the same through which the have see the package convey from the waggon . on pass through it find that they be not really within the building , but merely in a large bare , around the wall of which be stack the very object which have arouse his curiosity and his father 's speculation . all mystery have go from them now , however , for while some be still wrap in their sackcloth covering , other have be undo , and reveal themselves as great pig of lead . " there be my raw material , " say carelessly , nod at the heap . " every i have a send up , which serve me for a week , but we shall need to work double tide when and i be marry , and we get our great scheme under way . i have to be very careful about the quality of the lead , for , of course , every impurity be reproduce in the gold . " a heavy iron door lead into the inner chamber . unlock it , but only to disclose a second one about five foot further on . " this flooring be all disconnect at night , " he remark . " i have no doubt that there be a good deal of gossip in the about this sealed chamber , so i have to guard myself against some inquisitive ostler or too adventurous butler . " the inner door admit them into the laboratory , a high , bare , whitewash room with a glass roof . at one end be the furnace and boiler , the iron mouth of which be close , though the fierce red light beat through the crack , and a dull roar sound through the building . on either side innumerable huge jar stand range in row , tier top tier , while above them be column of voltaic cell . 's eye , as he glance around , light on vast wheel , complicated network of wire , stand , test-tube , coloured bottle , graduate glass , bunsen burner , porcelain insulator , and all the varied debris of a chemical and electrical workshop . " come across here , " say , pick his way among the heap of metal , the coke , the packing-case , and the carboy of acid . " yours be the first foot except my own which have ever penetrate to this room since the workman leave it . my servant carry the lead into the , but come no further . the furnace can be clean and stoke from without . i employ a fellow to do nothing else . now take a look in here . " he throw open a door on the further side , and motion to the young artist to enter . the latter stand silent with one foot over the threshold , stare in amazement around him . the room , which may have be some thirty foot square , be pave and wall with gold . great ingot , closely pack , cover the whole floor , while on every side they be rear up in compact barrier to the very ceiling . the single electric lamp which light the windowless chamber strike a dull , murky , yellow light from the vast pile of precious metal , and gleam ruddily upon the golden floor . " this be my treasure house , " remark the owner . " you see that i have rather an accumulation just now . my import have be exceed my export . you can understand that i have other and more important duty even than the making of gold , just now . this be where i store my output until i be ready to send it off . every night almost i be in the habit of send a case of it to . i employ seventeen broker in its sale . each think that he be the only one , and each be die to know where i can get such large quantity of virgin gold . they say that it be the pure which come into the market . the popular theory be , i believe , that i be a middleman act on behalf of some new south african mine , which wish to keep its whereabouts a secret . what value would you put upon the gold in this chamber ? it ought to be worth something , for it represent nearly a week 's work . " " something fabulous , i have no doubt , " say , glance round at the yellow barrier . " shall i say a hundred and fifty thousand pound ? " " oh dear me , it be surely worth very much more than that , " cry , laugh . " let me see . suppose that we put it at three ten an ounce , which be nearly ten shilling under the mark . that make , roughly , pound for a pound in weight . now each of these ingot weigh pound , which bring their value to two thousand and a few odd pound . there be five hundred ingot on each of these three side of the room , but on the fourth there be only three hundred , on account of the door , but there can be less than two hundred on the floor , which give us a rough total of two thousand ingot . so you see , my dear boy , that any broker who could get the content of this chamber for four million pound would be do a nice little stroke of business . " " and a week 's work ! " gasp . " it make my head swim . " " you will follow me now when i repeat that none of the great scheme which i intend to simultaneously set in motion be at all likely to languish for want of fund . now come into the laboratory with me and see how it be do . " in the centre of the workroom be an instrument like a huge vice , with two large plate , and a great steel screw for bring them together . numerous wire run into these metal plate , and be attach at the other end to the row of dynamic machine . beneath be a glass stand , which be hollow out in the centre into a succession of trough . " you will soon understand all about it , " say , throw off his coat , and pull on a and dirty linen jacket . " we must first stoke up a little . " he put his weight on a pair of great bellow , and an answering roar come from the furnace . " that will do . the more heat the more electric force , and the quick our task . now for the lead ! just give me a hand in carry it . " they lift a dozen of the pig of lead from the floor on to the glass stand , and have adjust the plate on either side , screw up the handle so as to hold them in position . " it use in the early day to be a slow process , " he remark ; " but now that i have immense facility for my work it take a very short time . i have now only to complete the connection in order to begin . " he take hold of a long glass lever which project from among the wire , and draw it downwards . a sharp click be hear , follow by a loud , sparkling , crackle noise . great spurt of flame spring from the two electrode , and the mass of lead be surround by an aureole of golden spark , which hiss and snap like . the air be fill with the peculiar acid smell of ozone . " the power there be immense , " say , superintend the process , with his watch upon the palm of his hand . " it would reduce an organic substance to protyle instantly . it be well to understand the mechanism thoroughly , for any mistake might be a grave matter for the operator . you be deal with gigantic force . but you perceive that the lead be already begin to turn . " silvery drop have indeed begin to form upon the mass , and to drop with a tinkle and splash into the glass trough . slowly the lead melt away , like an icicle in the sun , the electrode ever close upon it as it contract , until they come together in the centre , and a row of pool of quicksilver have take the place of the solid metal . two small electrode be plunge into the mercury , which gradually curdle and solidify , until it have resume the solid form , with a yellowish brassy shimmer . " what lie in the mould now be platinum , " remark . " we must take it from the trough and it in the large electrode . so ! now we turn on the current again . you see that it gradually take a dark and rich tint . now i think that it be perfect . " he draw up the lever , remove the electrode , and there lay a dozen brick of ruddy sparkling gold . " you see , accord to our calculation , our morning 's work have be worth thousand pound , and it have not take us more than twenty minute , " remark the alchemist , as he pick up the ingot , and throw them down among the other . " we will devote one of them to experiment , " say he , leave the last standing upon the glass insulator . " to the world it would seem an expensive demonstration which cost two thousand pound , but our standard , you see , be a different one . now you will see me run through the whole gamut of metallic nature . " first of all man after the discoverer , see the gold mass , when the electrode be again apply to it , change swiftly and successively to barium , to tin , to silver , to copper , to iron . he see the long white electric spark change to crimson with the strontium , to purple with the potassium , to yellow with the manganese . then , finally , after a hundred transformation , it disintegrate before his eye , and lie as a little mound of fluffy grey dust upon the glass table . " and this be protyle , " say , pass his finger through it . " the chemist of the future may resolve it into further constituent , but to me it be the . " " and now , , " he continue , after a pause , " i have show you enough to enable you to understand something of my system . this be the great secret . it be the secret which endow the man who know it with such a universal power as no man have ever enjoy since the world be make . this secret it be the dear wish of my heart to use for good , and i swear to you , , that if i think it would tend to anything but good i would have do with it for ever . no , i would neither use it myself nor would any other man learn it from my lip . i swear it by all that be holy and solemn ! " his eye flash as he speak , and his voice quiver with emotion . standing , pale and lanky , amid his electrode and his retort , there be still something majestic about this man , who , amid all his stupendous good fortune , could still keep his moral sense by the glitter of his gold . 's weak nature have never before realise the strength which lie in those thin , firm lip and earnest eye . " surely in your hand , , nothing but good can come of it , " he say . " i hope pray earnestly do i pray not . i have do for you , , what i might not have do for my own brother have one , and i have do it because i believe and hope that you be a man who would not use this power , should you inherit it , for selfish end . but even now i have not tell you all . there be one link which i have withhold from you , and which shall be withhold from you while i live . but look at this chest , . " he lead him to a great chest which stand in the corner , and , throw it open , he take from it a small case of carve ivory . " inside this , " he say , " i have leave a paper which make clear anything which be still hidden from you . should anything happen to me you will always be able to inherit my power , and to continue my plan by follow the direction which be there express . and now , " he continue , throw his casket back again into the box , " i shall frequently require your help , but i do not think it will be necessary this morning . i have already take up too much of your time . if you be go back to i wish that you would tell that i shall be with her in the afternoon . " and so the great secret be out , and walk home with his head in a whirl , and the blood tingle in his vein . he have shiver as he come up at the damp cold of the wind and the sight of the landscape . that be all go now . his own thought ting everything with sunshine , and he feel incline to sing and dance as he walk down the muddy , country lane . wonderful have be the fate allot to , but surely hardly less important that which have come upon himself . he be the sharer of the alchemist 's secret , and the heir to an inheritance which combine a wealth great than that of monarch , to a freedom such as monarch can enjoy . this be a destiny indeed ! a thousand vision of his future life rise up before him , and in fancy he already sit high above the human race , with prostrate thousand implore his aid , or thank him for his benevolence . how sordid seem the untidy garden , with its scrappy bush and gaunt elm tree ! how mean the plain brick front , with the green wooden porch ! it have always offend his artistic sense , but now it be obtrusive in its ugliness . the plain room , too , with the american leather chair , the carpet , and the patchwork rug , he feel a loathing for it all . the only pretty thing in it , upon which his eye could rest with satisfaction , be his sister , as she lean back in her chair by the fire with her white , clear beautiful face outline against the dark background . " do you know , , " she say , glance up at him from under her long black lash , " grow unendurable . i have have to speak very plainly to him , and to make him understand that i be marry for my own benefit and not for his . " " where be he , then ? " " i do n't know . at the , no doubt . he spend most of his time there now . he fly off in a passion , and talk such nonsense about marriage settlement , and forbid the banns , and so on . his notion of a marriage settlement appear to be a settlement upon the bride 's father . he should wait quietly , and see what can be do for him . " " i think , , that we must make a good deal of allowance for him , " say earnestly . " i have notice a great change in him lately . i do n't think he be himself at all . i must get some medical advice . but i have be up at the this morning . " " have you ? have you see ? do he send anything for me ? " " he say that he would come down when he have finish his work . " " but what be the matter , ? " cry , with the swift perception of womanhood . " you be flush , and your eye be shine , and really you look quite handsome . raffle have be tell you something ! what be it ? oh , i know ! he have be tell you how he make his money . have n't he , now ? " " well , yes . he take me partly into his confidence . i congratulate you , , with all my heart , for you will be a very wealthy woman . " " how strange it seem that he should have come to us in our poverty . it be all owe to you , you dear old ; for if he have not take a fancy to you , he would never have come down to and take a fancy to some one else . " " not at all , " answer , sit down by his sister , and pat her hand affectionately . " it be a clear case of love at first sight . he be in love with you before he ever know your name . he ask me about you the very first time i see him . " " but tell me about his money , , " say his sister . " he have not tell me yet , and i be so curious . how do he make it ? it be not from his father ; he tell me that himself . his father be just a country doctor . how do he do it ? " " i be bind over to secrecy . he will tell you himself . " " oh , but only tell me if i guess right . he have it leave him by an uncle , ? well , by a friend ? or he take out some wonderful patent ? or he discover a mine ? or oil ? do tell me , ! " " i must n't , really , " cry her brother laugh . " and i must not talk to you any more . you be much too sharp . i feel a responsibility about it ; and , besides , i must really do some work . " " it be very unkind of you , " say , pout . " but i must put my thing on , for i go into by the @card@ . " " to ? " " yes , i have a hundred thing to order . there be everything to be get . you man forget about these detail . raffle wish to have the wedding in little more than a fortnight . of course it will be very quiet , but still one need something . " " so early as that ! " say , thoughtfully . " well , perhaps it be well so . " " much well , . would it not be dreadful if come back first and there be a scene ? if i be once marry i should not mind . why should i ? but of course know nothing about him , and it would be terrible if they come together . " " that must be avoid at any cost . " " oh , i can bear even to think of it . ! and yet what could i do , ? you know that it be only a boy and girl affair . and how could i refuse such an offer as this ? it be a duty to my family , be it not ? " " you be place in a difficult difficult , " her brother answer . " but all will be right , and i have no doubt will see it as you do . but do know of your engagement ? " " not a word . he be here yesterday , and talk of , but indeed i do not know how to tell him . we be to be marry by special licence in , so really there be no reason why he should know . but now i must hurry or i shall miss my train . " when his sister be go go up to his studio , and have grind some colour upon his palette he stand for some time , brush and mahlstick in hand , in front of his big bare canvas . but how profitless all his work seem to him now ! what object have he in do it ? be it to earn money ? money could be have for the asking , or , for that matter , without the asking . or be it to produce a thing of beauty ? but he have artistic fault . raffle have say so , and he know that he be right . after all his pain the thing might not please ; and with money he could at all time buy picture which would please , and which would be thing of beauty . what , then , be the object of his working ? he could see none . he throw down his brush , and , light his pipe , he stroll downstairs once more . his father be stand in front of the fire , and in no very good humour , as his red face and pucker eye suffice to show . " well , , " he begin , " i suppose that , as usual , you have spend your morning plot against your father ? " " what do you mean , father ? " " i mean what i say . what be it but plot when three and she and this and arrange and have meeting without a word to me about it ? what do i know of your plan ? " " i can tell you secret which be not my own , father . " " but i will have a voice in the matter , for all that . secret or no secret , you will find that have a father , and that he be not a man to be set aside . i may have have my up and down in trade , but i have not quite fall so low that i be nothing in my own family . what be i to get out of this precious marriage ? " " what should you get ? surely 's happiness and welfare be enough for you ? " " if this man be really fond of he would show proper consideration for 's father . it be only yesterday that i ask him for a actually to ask for , who have be within an ace of be of ! and he refuse me point blank . " " oh , father ! how could you expose yourself to such humiliation ? " " refuse me point blank ! " cry the old man excitedly . " it be against his principle , if you please . but i will be even with see if i be not . i know one or two thing about him . what be it they call him at the ? ' be the coiner of false money . why else should he have this metal send him , and that great smoky chimney of his go all day ? " " why can you not leave him alone , father ? " expostulate . " you seem to think of nothing but his money . if he have not a penny he would still be a very kind-hearted , pleasant gentleman . " burst into a hoarse laugh . " i like to hear you preach , " say he . " without a penny , indeed ! do you think that you would dance attendance upon him if he be a poor man ? do you think that would ever have look twice at him ? you know as well as i do that she be marry him only for his money . " give a cry of dismay . there be the alchemist standing in the doorway , pale and silent , look from one to the other of them with his search eye . " i must apologise , " he say coldly . " i do not mean to listen to your word . i could not help it . but i have hear them . as to you , , i believe that you speak from your own bad heart . i will not let myself be move by your word . in i have a true friend . also love me for my own sake . you can shake my faith in them . but with you , , i have nothing in common ; and it be as well , perhaps , that we should both recognise the fact . " he bow , and be go ere either of the could say a word . " you see ! " say at last . " you have do now what you can undo ! " " i will be even with him ! " cry the old man furiously , shake his fist through the window at the dark figure . " you just wait , , and see if your old dad be a man to be play with . " not a word be say to when she return as to the scene which have occur in her absence . she be in the gay of spirit , and prattle merrily about her purchase and her arrangement , wonder from time to time when would come . as night fall , however , without any word from him , she become uneasy . " what can be the matter that he do not come ? " she say . " it be the first day since our engagement that i have not see him . " look out through the window . " it be a gusty night , and rain hard , " he remark . " i do not at all expect him . " " use to come , rain , snow , or fine . but , then , of course , he be a sailor . it be nothing to him . i hope that be not ill . " " he be quite well when i see him this morning , " answer her brother , and they relapse into silence , while the rain patter against the window , and the wind scream amid the branch of the elm outside . have sit in the corner most of the day bite his nail and glower into the fire , with a brood , malignant expression upon his wrinkle feature . contrary to his usual habit , he do not go to the village inn , but shuffle off early to bed without a word to his child . and remain chat for some time by the fire , she talk of the thousand and one wonderful thing which be to be do when she be mistress of the . there be less philanthropy in her talk when her future husband be absent , and could not but remark that her carriage , her dress , her reception , and her travel in distant country be the topic into which she throw all the enthusiasm which he have formerly hear her bestow upon refuge home and labour organisation . " i think that grey be the nice horse , " she say . " bay be nice too , but grey be more showy . we could manage with a brougham and a landau , and perhaps a high dog-cart for . he have the full at present , but he never use them , and i be sure that those fifty horse would all die for want of exercise , or get liver like goose , if they wait for him to ride or drive them . " " i suppose that you will still live here ? " say her brother . " we must have a house in as well , and run up for the season . i do n't , of course , like to make suggestion now , but it will be different afterwards . i be sure that will do it if i ask him . it be all very well for him to say that he do not want any thank or honour , but i should like to know what be the use of be a public benefactor if you be to have no return for it . i be sure that if he do only half what he talk of do , they will make him a , then , of course , i shall be my , and what would you think of that , ? " she drop him a stately curtsey , and toss her head in the air , as one who be bear to wear a coronet . " father must be pension off , " she remark presently . " he shall have so much a year on condition that he keep away . as to you , , i do n't know what we shall do for you . we shall make you of the if money can do it . " it be late before they cease build their and retire to their room . but 's brain be excite , and he could not sleep . the event of the day have be enough to shake a strong man . there have be the revelation of the morning , the strange sight which he have witness in the laboratory , and the immense secret which have be confide to his keep . then there have be his conversation with his father in the afternoon , their disagreement , and the sudden intrusion of . finally the talk with his sister have excite his imagination , and drive sleep from his eyelid . in vain he turn and twist in his bed , or pace the floor of his chamber . he be not only awake , but abnormally awake , with every nerve highly string , and every sense at the keen . what be he to do to gain a little sleep ? it flash across him that there be brandy in the decanter downstairs , and that a glass might act as a sedative . he have open the door of his room , when suddenly his ear catch the sound of slow and stealthy footstep upon the stair . his own lamp be unlit , but a dim glimmer come from a move taper , and a long black shadow travel down the wall . he stand motionless , listen intently . the step be in the hall now , and he hear a gentle creak as the key be cautiously turn in the door . the next instant there come a gust of cold air , the taper be extinguish , and a sharp snap announce that the door have be close from without . stand astonish . who could this night wanderer be ? it must be his father . but what errand could take him out at three in the morning ? and such a morning , too ! with every blast of the wind the rain beat up against his as though it would drive it in . the glass rattle in the frame , and the tree outside creak and groan as its great branch be toss about by the gale . what could draw any man forth upon such a night ? hurriedly strike a match and light his lamp . his father 's room be opposite his own , and the door be ajar . he push it open and look about him . it be empty . the bed have not even be lie upon . the single chair stand by the window , and there the old man must have sit since he leave them . there be no book , no paper , no means by which he could have amuse himself , nothing but a lie on the window-sill . a feeling of impending misfortune strike cold to 's heart . there be some in this journey of his father 's . he think of his brood of yesterday , his scowl face , his bitter threat . yes , there be some mischief underlie it . but perhaps he might even now be in time to prevent it . there be no use call . she could be no help in the matter . he hurriedly throw on his clothes , muffle himself in his top-coat , and , seize his hat and stick , he set off after his father . as he come out into the village street the wind whirl down it , so that he have to put his ear and shoulder against it , and push his way forward . it be well , however , when he turn into the lane . the high bank and the hedge shelter him upon one side . the road , however , be deep in mud , and the rain fall in a steady swish . not a soul be to be see , but he need to make no inquiry , for he know whither his father have go as certainly as though he have see him . the iron side gate of the avenue be half open , and stumble his way up the gravel drive amid the drip . what could his father 's intention be when he reach the ? be it merely that he wish to spy and prowl , or do he intend to call up the master and enter into some discussion as to his wrong ? or be it possible that some black and more sinister design lie beneath his strange doing ? think suddenly of the , and gasp with horror . what have the old man be do with that ? he quicken his pace to a run , and hurry on until he find himself at the door of the . thank ! all be quiet there . he stand by the big silent door and listen intently . there be nothing to be hear save the wind and the rain . where , then , could his father be ? if he wish to enter the he would not attempt to do so by one of the window , for have he not be present when have show them the precaution which he have take ? but then a sudden thought strike . there be one window which be leave unguarded . have be imprudent enough to tell them so . it be the middle window of the laboratory . if he remember it so clearly , of course his father would remember it too . there be the point of danger . the moment that he have come round the corner of the building he find that his surmise have be correct . an electric lamp burn in the laboratory , and the silver square of the three large window stand out clear and bright in the darkness . the centre one have be throw open , and , even as he gaze , see a dark figure spring up on to the sill , and vanish into the room beyond . for a moment only it outline itself against the brilliant light beyond , but in that moment have space to see that it be indeed his father . on tiptoe he cross the intervene space , and peep in through the open window . it be a singular spectacle which meet his eye . there stand upon the glass table some half-dozen large ingot of gold , which have be make the night before , but which have not be remove to the treasure-house . on these the old man have throw himself , as one who enter into his rightful inheritance . he lie across the table , his arm clasp the bar of gold , his cheek press against them , croon and mutter to himself . under the clear , still light , amid the giant wheel and strange engine , that one little dark figure clutch and cling to the ingot have in it something both weird and piteous . for five minute or more stand in the darkness amid the rain , look in at this strange sight , while his father hardly move save to cuddle closer to the gold , and to pat it with his thin hand . be still uncertain what he should do , when his eye wander from the central figure and fall on something else which make him give a little cry of cry which be drown amid the howl of the gale . raffle be stand in the corner of the room . where he have come from could not say , but he be certain that he have not be there when he first look in . he stand silent , wrap in some long , dark dressing-gown , his arm fold , and a bitter smile upon his pale face . seem to see him at almost the same moment , for he snarl out an oath , and clutch still close at his treasure , look slantwise at the master of the house with furtive , treacherous eye . " and it have really come to this ! " say at last , take a step forward . " you have actually fall so low , , as to steal into my house at night like a common burglar . you know that this window be unguarded . i remember tell you as much . but i do not tell you what other mean i have adopt by which i might be warn if knave make an entrance . but that you should have come ! you ! " the old make no attempt to justify himself , but he mutter some few hoarse word , and continue to cling to the treasure . " i love your daughter , " say , " and for her sake i will not expose you . your hideous and infamous secret shall be safe with me . no ear shall hear what have happen this night . i will not , as i might , arouse my servant and send for the police . but you must leave my house without further word . i have nothing more to say to you . go as you have come . " he take a step forward , and hold out his hand as if to detach the old man 's grasp from the golden bar . the other thrust his hand into the breast of his coat , and with a shrill scream of rage fling himself upon the alchemist . so sudden and so fierce be the movement that have no time for defence . a bony hand grip him by the throat , and the blade of a razor flash in the air . fortunately , as it fall , the weapon strike against one of the many wire which span the room , and fly out of the old man 's grasp , tinkle upon the stone floor . but , though disarm , he be still dangerous . with a horrible silent energy he push back and back until , come to a bench , they both fall over it , remain uppermost . his other hand be on the alchemist 's throat , and it might have fare ill with him have not climb through the window and drag his father off from him . with the aid of , he pin the old man down , and pass a long cravat around his arm . it be terrible to look at him , for his face be convulse , his eye bulge from his head , and his lip white with foam . lean against the glass table pant , with his hand to his side . " you here , ? " he gasp . " be it not horrible ? how do you come ? " " i follow him . i hear him go out . " " he would have rob me . and he would have murder me . but he be , stare mad ! " there could be no doubt of it . be sit up now , and burst suddenly into a hoarse peal of laughter , rock himself backwards and forwards , and look up at them with little twinkling , cunning eye . it be clear to both of them that his mind , weaken by long brood over the one idea , have now at last become that of a monomaniac . his horrid causeless mirth be more terrible even than his fury . " what shall we do with him ? " ask . " we can take him back to . it would be a terrible shock to . " " we could have doctor to certify in the morning . could we not keep him here until then ? if we take him back , some one will meet us , and there will be a scandal . " " i know . we will take him to one of the pad room , where he can neither hurt himself nor anyone else . i be somewhat shake myself . but i be well now . do you take one arm , and i will take the other . " and him they manage between them to convey the old away from the scene of his disaster , and to lodge him for the night in a place of safety . at five in the morning have start in the gig to make the medical arrangement , while pace his palatial house with a troubled face and a sad heart . it may be that do not look upon the removal of her father as an unmixed misfortune . nothing be say to her as to the manner of the old man 's seizure , but inform her at breakfast that he have think it well , act under medical advice , to place him for a time under some restraint . she have herself frequently remark upon the grow eccentricity of his manner , so that the announcement could have be no great surprise to her . it be certain that it do not diminish her appetite for the coffee and the scrambled egg , nor prevent her from chat a good deal about her approach wedding . but it be very different with . the incident have shock him to his inmost soul . he have often fear lest his money should do indirect evil , but here be crime and madness arise before his very eye from its influence . in vain he try to choke down his feeling , and to persuade himself that this attack of old 's be something which come of which have no connection with himself or his wealth . he remember the man as he have first meet him , garrulous , foolish , but with no obvious vice . he recall the change which , week by week , have come over greedy eye , his furtive manner , his hint and innuendoe , end only the day before in a positive demand for money . it be too certain that there be a chain of event there lead direct to the horrible encounter in the laboratory . his money have cast a blight where he have hope to shed a blessing . , the vicar , be up shortly after breakfast , some rumour of evil have come to his ear . it be good for to talk with him , for the fresh breezy manner of the old clergyman be a corrective to his own sombre and introspective mood . " , tut ! " say he . " this be very bad indeed ! mind unhinge , you say , and not likely to get over it ! dear , dear ! i have notice a change in him these last few week . he look like a man who have something upon his mind . and how be ? " " he be very well . he be with me this morning when his father have this attack . " " ! there be a change in that young man . i observe an alteration in him . you will forgive me , , if i say a few serious word of advice to you . apart from my spiritual function i be old enough to be your father . you be a very wealthy man , and you have use your wealth , sir , nobly . i do not think that there be a man in a thousand who would have do as well . but do n't you think sometimes that it have a dangerous influence upon those who be around you ? " " i have sometimes fear so . " " we may pass over old . it would hardly be just , perhaps , to mention him in this connection . but there be . he use to take such an interest in his profession . he be so keen about art . if you meet him , the first word he say be usually some reference to his plan , or the progress he be make in his late picture . he be ambitious , push , self-reliant . now he do nothing . i know for a fact that it be two month since he put brush to canvas . he have turn from a student into an idler , and , what be bad , i fear into a parasite . you will forgive me for speak so plainly ? " raffle say nothing , but he throw out his hand with a gesture of pain . " and then there be something to be say about the country folk , " say the vicar . " your kindness have be , perhaps , a little indiscriminate there . they do n't seem to be as helpful or as self-reliant as they use . there be old , whose cowhouse roof be blow off the other day . he use to be a man who be full of energy and resource . three month ago he would have get a ladder and have that roof on again in two day ' work . but now he must sit down , and wring his hand , and write letter , because he know that it would come to your ear , and that you would make it good . there be old , too ! well , of course he be always poor , but at least he do something , and so keep himself out of mischief . not a stroke will he do now , but smoke and talk scandal from morning to night . and the bad of it be , that it not only hurt those who have have your help , but it unsettle those who have not . they all have an injured , surly feeling as if other folk be get what they have an equal right to . it have really come to such a pitch that i think it be a duty to speak to you about it . well , it be a new experience to me . i have often have to reprove my parishioner for not be charitable enough , but it be very strange to find one who be too charitable . it be a noble error . " " i thank you very much for let me know about it , " answer , as he shake the good old clergyman 's hand . " i shall certainly reconsider my conduct in that respect . " he keep a rigid and unmoved face until his visitor have go , and then retire to his own little room , he throw himself upon the bed and burst out sob with his face bury in the pillow . of all man in , this , the rich , be on that day the most miserable . how could he use this great power which he hold ? every blessing which he try to give turn itself into a curse . his intention be so good , and yet the result be so terrible . it be as if he have some foul leprosy of the mind which all catch who be expose to his influence . his charity , so well mean , so carefully bestow , have yet poison the whole countryside . and if in small thing his result be so evil , how could he tell that they would be good in the large plan which he have form ? if he could not pay the debt of a simple yokel without disturb the great law of cause and effect which lie at the base of all thing , what could he hope for when he come to fill the treasury of nation , to interfere with the complex condition of trade , or to provide for great mass of the population ? he draw back with horror as he dimly see that vast problem face him in which he might make error which all his money could not repair . the way of be the straight way . yet he , a creature , must needs push in and strive to alter and correct it . would he be a benefactor ? might he not rather prove to be the great malefactor that the world have see ? but soon a calm mood come upon him , and he rise and bath his flush face and fevered brow . after all , be not there a field where all be agree that money might be well spend ? it be not the way of nature , but rather the way of man which he would alter . it be not that have ordain that folk should live and overcrowd in dreary slum . that be the result of artificial condition , and it might well be heal by artificial mean . why should not his plan be successful after all , and the world well for his discovery ? then again , it be not the truth that he cast a blight on those with whom he be bring in contact . there be ; who know more of him than she do , and yet how good and sweet and true she be ! she at least have lose nothing through know him . he would go down and see her . it would be soothing to hear her voice , and to turn to her for word of sympathy in this his hour of darkness . the storm have die away , but a soft wind be blow , and the smack of the come spring be in the air . he draw in the aromatic scent of the as he pass down the curve drive . before him lie the long sloping countryside , all dot over with the and little red cottage , with the morning sun strike slantwise upon their grey roof and glimmer window . his heart yearn over all these people with their manifold trouble , their little sordid misery , their and and petty care . how could he get at them ? how could he manage to lift the burden from them , and yet not hinder them in their life aim ? for more and more could he see that all refinement be through sorrow , and that the life which do not refine be the life without an aim . be alone in the sitting-room at , for have go out to make some final arrangement about his father . she spring up as her lover enter , and run forward with a pretty girlish gesture to greet him . " oh , ! " she cry , " i know that you would come . be it not dreadful about papa ? " " you must not fret , dear , " he answer gently . " it may not prove to be so very grave after all . " " but it all happen before i be stir . i know nothing about it until . they must have go up to the very early . " " yes , they do come up rather early . " " what be the matter with you , ? " cry , look up into his face . " you look so sad and weary ! " " i have be a little in the blue . the fact be , , that i have have a long talk with this morning . " the girl start , and turn white to the lip . a long talk with ! do that mean that he have learn her secret ? " well ? " she gasp . " he tell me that my charity have do more harm than good , and in fact , that i have have an evil influence upon every one whom i have come near . he say it in the most delicate way , but that be really what it amount to . " " oh , be that all ? " say , with a long sigh of relief . " you must not think of mind what say . why , it be absurd on the face of it ! everybody know that there be dozen of man all over the country who would have be ruin and turn out of their house if you have not stand their friend . how could they be the worse for have know you ? i wonder that can talk such nonsense ! " " how be 's picture get on ? " " oh , he have a lazy fit on him . he have not touch it for ever so long . but why do you ask that ? you have that furrow on your brow again . put it away , sir ! " she smooth it away with her little white hand . " well , at any rate , i do n't think that quite everybody be the bad , " say he , look down at her . " there be one , at least , who be beyond taint , one who be good , and pure , and true , and who would love me as well if i be a poor clerk struggle for a livelihood . you would , would you not , ? " " you foolish boy ! of course i would . " " and yet how strange it be that it should be so . that you , who be the only woman whom i have ever love , should be the only one in whom i also have raise an affection which be free from greed or interest . i wonder whether you may not have be send by simply to restore my confidence in the world . how barren a place would it not be if it be not for woman 's love ! when all seem black around me this morning , i tell you , , that i seem to turn to you and to your love as the one thing on earth upon which i could rely . all else seem shifting , unstable , influence by this or that base consideration . in you , and you only , could i trust . " " and i in you , dear ! i never know what love be until i meet you . " she take a step towards him , her hand advance , love shine in her feature , when in an instant see the colour strike from her face , and a stare horror spring into her eye . her blanch and rigid face be turn towards the open door , while he , stand partly behind it , could not see what it be that have so move her . " ! " she gasp , with dry lip . a quick step in the hall , and a slim , young man spring forward into the room , and catch her up in his arm as if she have be a feather . " you darling ! " he say ; " i know that i would surprise you . i come right up from by the night train . and i have long leave , and plenty of time to get married . be n't it jolly , dear ? " he pirouette round with her in the exuberance of his delight . as he spin round , however , his eye fall suddenly upon the pale and silent stranger who stand by the door . blush furiously , and make an awkward sailor bow , stand with 's cold and unresponsive hand still clasp in his . " very sorry , n't see you , " he say . " you will excuse my go on in this mad sort of way , but if you have serve you would know what it be to get away from quarter-deck manner , and to be a free man . will tell you that we have know each other since we be child , and as we be to be marry in , i hope , a month at the late , we understand each other pretty well . " raffle still stand cold and motionless . he be stun , benumb , by what he see and hear . draw away from , and try to free her hand from his grasp . " do n't you get my letter at ? " she ask . " never go to . be order home by wire from . those chap at the never know their own mind for two hour together . but what matter about a letter , , so long as i can see you and speak with you ? you have not introduce me to your friend here . " " one word , sir , " cry in a quiver voice . " do i entirely understand you ? let me be sure that there be no mistake . you say that you be engage to be marry to ? " " of course i be . i have just come back from a four month ' cruise , and i be go to be marry before i drag my anchor again . " " four month ! " gasp . " why , it be just four month since i come here . and one last question , sir . do know of your engagement ? " " do know ? of course he know . why , it be to his care i leave when i start . but what be the meaning of all this ? what be the matter with you , ? why be you so white and silent ? ! hold up , sir ! the man be faint ! " " it be all right ! " gasp , steady himself against the edge of the door . he be as white as paper , and his hand be press close to his side as though some sudden pain have shoot through him . for a moment he totter there like a stricken man , and then , with a hoarse cry , he turn and flee out through the open door . " poor devil ! " say , gaze in amazement after him . " he seem hard hit anyhow . but what be the meaning of all this , ? " his face have darken , and his mouth have set . she have not say a word , but have stand with a face like a mask look blankly in front of her . now she tear herself away from him , and , cast herself down with her face bury in the cushion of the sofa , she burst into a passion of sob . " it mean that you have ruin me , " she cry . " that you have me ! could you not leave us alone ? why must you come at the last moment ? a few more day , and we be safe . and you never have my letter . " " and what be in your letter , then ? " he ask coldly , stand with his arm fold , look down at her . " it be to tell you that i release you . i love , and i be to have be his wife . and now it be all go . oh , , i hate you , and i shall always hate you as long as i live , for you have step between me and the only good fortune that ever come to me . leave me alone , and i hope that you will never cross our threshold again . " " be that your last word , ? " " the last that i shall ever speak to you . " " then , good-bye . i shall see the , and go straight back to . " he wait an instant , in hope of an answer , and then walk sadly from the room . it be late that night that a startle knock come at the door of . have be in her room all day , and be moodily smoke his pipe by the fire , when this harsh and sudden summons break in upon his thought . there in the porch be , the stout of the , hatless , scared , with the raindrop shine in the lamplight upon his smooth , bald head . " if you please , , sir , would it trouble you to step up to the ? " he cry . " we be all frightened , sir , about master . " catch up his hat and start at a run , the frightened butler trot heavily beside him . it have be a day of excitement and disaster . the young artist 's heart be heavy within him , and the shadow of some crown trouble seem to have fall upon his soul . " what be the matter with your master , then ? " he ask , as he slow down into a walk . " we do n't know , sir ; but we ca n't get an answer when we knock at the laboratory door . yet he be there , for it be lock on the inside . it have give us all a scare , sir , that , and his during the day . " " his goings-on ? " " yes , sir ; for he come back this morning like a man dement , ' to himself , and with his eye ' so that it be dreadful to look at the poor dear gentleman . then he walk about the passage a long time , and he would n't so much as look at his luncheon , but he go into the museum , and gather all his jewel and thing , and carry them into the laboratory . we do n't know what he be do since then , sir , but his furnace have be ' , and his big chimney ' smoke like a factory . when night come we could see his figure against the light , ' and ' like a man possess . no dinner would he have , but work , and work , and work . now it be all quiet , and the furnace cold , and no smoke from above , but we ca n't get no answer from him , sir , so we be scare , and have go for the police , and i come away for you . " they reach the as the butler finish his explanation , and there outside the laboratory door stand the little knot of footman and ostler , while the village policeman , who have just arrive , be hold his bull's-eye to the keyhole , and endeavour to peep through . " the key be , " he say . " i ca n't see nothing except just the light . " " here be , " cry voice , as come forward . " we will have to beat the door in , sir , " say the policeman . " we ca n't get any sort of answer , and there be something wrong . " twice and thrice they throw their unite weight against it until at last with a sharp snap the lock break , and they crowd into the narrow passage . the inner door be ajar , and the laboratory lie before them . in the centre be an enormous heap of fluffy grey ash , reach up half-way to the ceiling . beside it be another heap , much small , of some brilliant scintillate dust , which shimmer brightly in the ray of the electric light . all round be a bewilder chaos of break jar , shattered bottle , cracked machinery , and tangled wire , all bent and draggle . and there in the midst of this universal ruin , lean back in his chair with his hand clasp upon his lap , and the easy pose of one who rest after hard work safely carry through , sit , the master of the house , and the rich of mankind , with the pallor of death upon his face . so easily he sit and so naturally , with such a serene expression upon his feature , that it be not until they raise him , and touch his cold and rigid limb , that they could realise that he have indeed pass away . reverently and slowly they bear him to his room , for he be beloved by all who have serve him . alone linger with the policeman in the laboratory . like a man in a dream he wander about , marvel at the universal destruction . a large hammer lie upon the ground , and with this have apparently set himself to destroy all his apparatus , have first use his electrical machine to reduce to protyle all the stock of gold which he have accumulate . the which have so dazzle consist now of merely four bare wall , while the gleam dust upon the floor proclaim the fate of that magnificent collection of gem which have alone amount to a royal fortune . of all the machinery no single piece remain intact , and even the glass table be shatter into three piece . strenuously earnest must have be the work which have do that day . and suddenly think of the secret which have be treasure in the casket within the box . it be to tell him the one last essential link which would make his knowledge of the process complete . be it still there ? thrill all over , he open the great chest , and draw out the ivory box . it be lock , but the key be in it . he turn it and throw open the lid . there be a white slip of paper with his own name write upon it . with tremble finger he unfold it . be he the heir to the riches of , or be he destine to be a poor struggling artist ? the note be date that very evening , and run in this way : " my , -- secret shall never be use again . i can tell you how i thank that i do not entirely confide it to you , for i should have be hand over an inheritance of misery both to yourself and other . for myself i have hardly have a happy moment since i discover it . this i could have bear have i be able to feel that i be do good , but , alas ! the only effect of my attempt have be to turn worker into idler , contented man into greedy parasite , and , bad of all , true , pure woman into deceiver and hypocrite . if this be the effect of my interference on a small scale , i can hope for anything well be i to carry out the plan which we have so often discuss . the scheme of my life have all turn to nothing . for myself , you shall never see me again . i shall go back to the student life from which i emerge . there , at least , if i can do little good , i can do no harm . it be my wish that such valuable as remain in the should be sell , and the proceed divide amidst all the charity of . i shall leave tonight if i be well enough , but i have be much trouble all day by a stab pain in my side . it be as if wealth be as bad for health as it be for peace of mind . good-bye , , and may you never have as sad a heart as i have . yours very truly , . " " be it suicide , sir ? be it suicide ? " broke in the policeman as put the note in his pocket . " no , " he answer ; " i think it be a break heart . " and so the wonder of the be all dismantle , the carving and the gold , the book and the picture , and many a struggle man or woman who have hear nothing of during his life have cause to bless him after his death . the house have be buy by a company now , who have turn it into a hydropathic establishment , and of all the folk who frequent it in search of health or of pleasure there be few who know the strange story which be connect with it . the blight which 's wealth cast around it seem to last even after his death . still rave in the , and treasure up old scrap of wood and metal under the impression that they be all ingot of gold . be a moody and irritable man , for ever pursue a quest which will always evade him . his art be forget , and he spend his whole small income upon chemical and electrical appliance , with which he vainly seek to that one hidden link . his sister keep house for him , a silent and brood woman , still queenly and beautiful , but of a bitter , dissatisfied mind . of late , however , she have devote herself to charity , and have be of so much help to 's new curate that it be think that he may be tempt to secure her assistance for ever . so run the gossip of the village , and in small place such gossip be seldom wrong . as to , he be still in her 's service , and seem incline to abide by his father 's wise advice , that he should not think of marry until he be a . it be possible that of all who be bring within the spell of he be the only one who have occasion to bless it .